Once again I find myself in front of the small painting in a simple 
frame. Tomorrow morning I leave for the village, and I gaze long and 
intently at the canvas, as if it can give me a word of advice for the 
journey ahead. 

It has never been exhibited. Moreover, when relatives from home 
come to visit, I make sure it is out of sight. There is nothing to be 
ashamed of, though it is not really a work of art. It is as plain as the 
earth depicted in it. 

The background is a patch of bleak autumn sky with the wind 
chasing fast-moving skewbald clouds over the far mountain range. The 
russet wormwood-covered steppe, a road black and damp from the 
recent rains, and the dry broken bushes of needle glass crowding at the 
roadside form the foreground. The footprints of two travellers follow a 
washed-out dirt road. Their tracks appear ever fainter as the road 
dwindles in the distance. It seems that if they were to take another step, 
they would disappear behind the frame. One of them.... However, I'm 
forestalling events. 

It all happened when I was still a boy. It was the third year of war. 
Somewhere far away, at Kursk and Orel, our fathers and brothers 
battled the enemy, while we, lads of fifteen, worked on the collective 
farm. Our skinny young shoulders had to carry the full brunt of a 
grown man's job. Harvest time was the hardest of all. We were away 
from home for weeks on end, spending our days and nights in the field, 
at the threshing-floor, or on the road to the railway station, delivering 
the grain. 

Driving my empty trap back from the station on one such scorching 



day, when our scythes seemed red-hot from reaping, I decided to stop 
off at home. 

At the very end of the street, on a hillock near the ford, are two 
houses with a stout adobe wall around them and tall poplars growing 
beyond the wall. These are our houses. For many years our families 
have lived side by side. I was from the Big House. I had two brothers, 
both older than I, both bachelors, both away, at the front, and there had 
been no word from either for it long time. 

My father was an old carpenter. After, saying his mourning prayer 
at dawn he went to work in the carpentry shop in the common yard, 
where he stayed till late in the evening. 

My mother and little sister remained at home. 

Our close relatives lived in the neighbouring yard, known to the 
villagers as the Small House. Our great-grandfathers or great-great- 
grandfathers were brothers, but I call them close relatives because we 
lived as one family. It had been so since the time our people had been 
nomads, when our great-grandfathers used to break camp and round up 
their cattle together. We kept this tradition alive. When our village was 
collectivised, our, fathers built their houses side by side. Actually, we 
were all fellowtribesmen— the whole of Aralskaya Street, stretching the 
length of the village to the river, was inhabited by our kinsfolk. 

Soon after we joined the collective farm, the master of the Small 
House died, leaving a widow and two small sons. According to the old 
custom of tribal law which was still adhered to in the village at the 
time, it was forbidden to let a widow who had sons leave the tribe, and 
it was therefore agreed that my father should marry her. His duty to the 
spirits of his ancestors compelled him to do this, for he was the 
deceased man's closest relative. 

That is how we came to have a second family. The Small House 
was considered an independent household with its own grounds and its 
own cattle, but, actually, we lived together. 

The Small House had also sent two sons off to war. The eldest, 
Sadyk, had left soon after he married. We received letters from them, 
though they were few and far between. 

Thus there remained in the Small House the mother, whom I called 
kichine — younger mother— and her daughter-in-law, Sadyk's wife. Both 
worked on the collective farm from morning till night. My younger 
mother was kind, complacent and mild-tempered; she kept up with the 
younger women in everything, be it in digging the irrigation ditches or 
in watering the fields. Fate had rewarded her with a hard-working 



daughter-in-law. Jamila was a good match for her mother-in-law; she 
was indefatigable and nimble, though of a very different temperament. 

I loved Jamila dearly. And she loved me. We were great friends, 
yet we did not dare call each other by our first names. Had we been 
from different families, I would have certainly called her Jamila. 
However, since she was the wife of my eldest brother, I had to call her 
djene, while she, in turn, called me kichine bala — little boy— though I 
was far from little and there was a very small difference in our ages. 
Such was the custom of our villages: daughters-in-law called their 
husband's younger brothers kichine bala. 

My mother managed both households. My little sister, a funny girl 
with braids tied with strings, helped her. I shall never forget how hard 
she worked during those difficult years. It was she who took the lambs 
and calves of both houses to pasture; it was she who gathered dung and 
dry branches, to always have a supply of fuel in the house. It was she, 
my snub-nosed little sister, who brightened my mother's days of 
loneliness, distracting her from the gloomy thoughts of her sons who 
were missing in action. 

Our large family owed the prevailing spirit of concord and plenty 
to my mother's efforts. She was the full-fledged mistress of both 
houses, the keeper of the home. She had come into the family of our 
nomad grandfathers as a young girl and had always revered their 
memory, ruling the families justly. The wisdom, fairness and efficiency 
with which she ran her home gave her a position of consequence in the 
village. At home Mother was in charge of everything. To tell the truth, 
our fellow- villagers never considered my father the head of the family. 
They would often say: "Ah, don't go to the ustaka (that is our term of 
respect for a craftsman), all he knows about is his axe. Their Eldest 
Mother is in charge of everything. You'll make out much better by 
going to her." 

Despite my young years, I had a say in our household .affairs, 
which was admissible only because my elder brothers had gone off to 
war. More often in jest, but sometimes quite seriously, I was called 
"the supporter of the two families", the protector and bread-winner. I 
was proud of this and felt a deep sense of responsibility. Besides, my 
mother encouraged this feeling of responsibility. She wanted me to 
become a good farmer, smart and ambitious, not a man like my father, 
who spent his days planing and sawing away in silence. 

Well then, I pulled my trap up in the shade of a willow, loosened 
the traces and, heading towards the yard, spied Orozmat, our 



teamleader. He was on horseback with his crutch tied to the saddle as 
always. My mother stood beside him. They were arguing. As I came 
closer, I heard my mother say: 

"Never! Is there no fear of Allah in you? Who ever heard of a 
woman delivering sacks of grain in a trap? No, my good man, you 
leave my daughter-in-law out of this, let her work as she's been 
working. I never see the light of day as it is. You try to keep house in 
two houses! It's a good thing my daughter's big enough to help now. I 
haven't been able to straighten out for a week, my back hurts so. It's as 
if I've been making felt. And look at the corn, drying on the stalks 
without water!" she spoke heatedly while tucking the end of her turban 
under her collar, a sign that she was angry. 

"Can't you understand?" Orozmat cried in despair, as he lurched 
forward. "Do you think I'd ever come to ask you if I had a leg instead 
of this stump? Why, I'd toss the sacks in the trap myself and whip on 
the horses like I used to! I know it's not a woman's job, but where am I 
to get the men? That's why we've decided to ask the soldiers' wives. 
You don't want to let your daughter-in-law go, but I can't get the farm 
chairman off my neck. The soldiers need bread, and we're disrupting 
the plan. Can't you understand that?" 

I came up to them, dragging my whip along the ground. When the 
teamleader noticed me, he beamed, apparently struck by a thought. 

"Well, if you're so concerned about your daughter-in-law, her 
kichine bala here won't let anyone get fresh with her." And he pointed 
to me happily. "Have no fear! Seit is a fine lad. It's boys like him, our 
real bread-winners, who always see us through." 

My mother did not hear him out. 

"My goodness, just look at yourself, you tramp!" she wailed, 
pointing to me. "And your hair is as long as a mane! Your father's a 
fine one— he can't even find time to shave his son's head." 

"Well, then, let the boy rest at home with his parents today and 
have his head shaved," Orozmat said in tone with my mother. "Seit, 
you stay here today, feed your horses, and tomorrow morning we'll 
give Jamila a trap. You'll work together. But mind, you'll be 
responsible for her! Now, don't worry, baibiche, Seit will take good 
care of her. What's more. I'll send Daniyar along with them. You know 
him, he's a harmless fellow, the one who was just demobilised. The 
three of them can deliver the grain to the station, and then who'll ever 
dare approach your daughter-in-law? Am I right? What do you say, 
Seit? We want to make Jamila a driver, but your mother won't hear of 



it. You try to persuade her." 

I was flattered by Orozmat's praise and by the fact that he had 
consulted me as he would a grown man. Besides, I immediately 
visualised how nice it would be to drive to the station with Jamilla. 
Putting on a very grave look, I said to my mother: 

"Nothing'll happen to her, there are no wolves along the way." 

And, casually spitting through my teeth like a regular driver, I 
sauntered off with an air of importance, dragging the whip behind me. 

"Listen to him!" my mother cried in surprise. She,seemed somehow 
pleased, but immediately added in an angry voice: "What do you know 
about wolves, you wise acre!" 

"Well, who should know if not he— he's the supporter of the two 
families, and you can be proud of him!" Orozmat said, fearing lest my 
mother turn stubborn again. 

But my mother did not object. She suddenly looked tired and said, 
sighing deeply: 

"He's far from that. He's still a child, but even so, he's at work day 
and night. Allah alone knows where our dear djigits are. Our houses 
have become as empty as forsaken camps. 

I was now beyond earshot, so my mother's following words were 
lost on me. I lashed at the corner of the house, raising a cloud of dust, 
and strutted towards the door without even returning my sister's smile. 
She was making dung cakes for fuel in the yard, slapping them against 
her palms. At the entrance I squatted and slowly washed my hands, 
pouring the water from a pitcher. Then I entered the room, drank a cup 
of sour milk and set a second cup on the window-sill, crumbling a 
chunk of bread into it. 

My mother and Orozmat were still in the yard; they were no longer 
arguing, but were talking calmly in soft voices. They must have been 
speaking of my brothers. My mother kept wiping her eyes with her 
sleeve, nodding her head absently at his words. Orozmat was 
apparently consoling her. My mother looked off into the distance and 
over the tree-tops, as if her clouded gaze would come upon her sons 
there. 

Preoccupied with her sad thought, she seemed to have finally 
agreed to Orozmat's suggestion. He was pleased at having achieved his 
aim, whipped his horse and trotted out of the yard. 

Needless to say, neither my mother nor I then knew what all this 
would lead to. 

I had no doubt that Jamila would be able to handle a two-horse 



trap. She was a good horsewoman, for she was the daughter of a horse- 
breeder from the mountain village of Bakair. Our Sadyk was also a 
horse-breeder. It was said that at the spring races he could not overtake 
Jamila. Perhaps that was so, but they said that after that the insulted 
Sadyk had kidnapped her. Others, however, said it was a love match. 

Be that as it may, they had only been married for four months. Then 
war broke out and Sadyk was called up. 

I don't know why— perhaps it was because Jamila had herded horses 
with her father from childhood on, for she was his only child, both son 
and daughter to him— but there was something masculine in her, a 
sharpness and at times even rudeness, and she worked just as doggedly 
as a man would. She got along well with the other women, but if they 
criticised her undeservedly she would never let them get the better of 
her; there were even times when she had pulled another woman's hair 
in anger. 

The neighbours would come to complain: 

"What kind of a daughter-in-law do you have? She's only just come 
to live with you, and her tongue's already a mile long! No respect and 
no modesty!" 

"I'm glad she's like that!" my mother would answer. "Our daughter- 
in-law tells a person the truth right to his face. That's better than being 
two-faced. Your daughters pretend they're sweet, though their 
sweetness is like a rotten egg: nice and smooth on the outside, but you 
have to hold your nose if you look inside." 

My father and my younger mother were never as strict and exacting 
towards Jamila as a mother- and father-in-law should be. They were 
good to her and loved her and their one wish was that she be faithful to 
Allah and to her husband. 

I understood them. Having seen four sons off to war, they found 
consolation in Jamila, the only daughter-in-law of the two houses, and 
that is why they were so concerned with her well-being. But I could not 
understand my own mother. She was not a person who could simply 
extend her love to someone. My mother was domineering and harsh by 
nature. She lived according to her own set of rules and was never 
untrue to them. For instance, with the coming of spring she never failed 
to pitch the old nomad's tent my father had made in his youth and to 
burn juniper branches in it. She brought us up to be hardworking, to 
respect our elders and demanded absolute obedience from every 
member of the family. 

From the very first Jamila had not been the accepted kind of 



daughter-in-law. True enough, she respected her elders and obeyed 
them, but she never shrank before them. True, nor did she whisper 
maliciously behind their backs, as other young daughters-in-law did. 
She always said what she thought and was never afraid to express her 
opinions. My mother often supported her and agreed with her, but she 
always had the last say. 

I believed that she regarded Jamila, with her frankness and fairness, 
as an equal to herself and secretly dreamed of some day making her as 
powerful a mistress and baibiche — the keeper of the home— as she 
herself. 

"Praise Allah, my daughter, that you have come into such a well- 
knit and blessed family," my mother would repeat. "That's your luck. A 
woman's happiness lies in bearing children and living in a house of 
plenty. Allah be praised, you will have everything that we old people 
have acquired: we won't take it with us, you know. But happiness is the 
lot of those who keep their honour and conscience clean. Remember 
this and take care!" 

However, there was something about Jamila that bothered her two 
mothers-in-law: she was too high-spirited. It was as if she were still a 
child. She would suddenly burst out laughing loudly and happily for no 
reason at all. And when she returned from work, instead of walking 
sedately, she would dash into the yard, leaping over the irrigation ditch. 
Then, for no apparent reason, she would begin hugging and kissing 
first one mother-in-law and then the other. 

Jamila loved to sing. She was always humming something, 
unembarrassed by the presence of her elders. Obviously, this was not 
in keeping with our set village conception of a daughter-in-law's 
behaviour. But both mothers-in-law consoled themselves by saying 
that Jamila would settle down in time, for hadn't they all been like that 
when they were young? As far as I was concerned, there was no one 
better than Jamila in the whole world. We had lots of fun together, 
chasing each other round the yard and laughing and laughing. 

Jamila was very pretty. She was well built and graceful, with 
straight hair braided in two tight and heavy plaits; she tied her white 
kerchief at an angle of her forehead; it was very becoming this way and 
striking against her dark complexion. When she smiled, her black 
almond eyes lit up mischievously, and when she suddenly broke into 
one of the naughty village ditties, her lovely eyes became as naughty. 

I often noticed that the young djigits, and especially men back from 
the fighting lines, were much taken by her. Jamila always enjoyed a 



joke, but she was quick to check anyone who took liberties. 
Nevertheless, I always resented this. I was jealous of her, as younger 
brothers are jealous of their sisters, and if I noticed a young man near 
her, I did my best to interfere. I would bristle and look at him with 
hatred, as if to say: "Watch your step. She's my brother's wife, and 
don't think there's no one to protect her!" 

At such moments I would butt into the conversation with 
exaggerated familiarity in an effort to ridicule her suitors. Failing to do 
so, I would lose my self-control, ruffle my feathers and retreat in a 
huff. 

The young men would burst out laughing: 

"Just look at him! Why, she must be his djene. Isn't that something! 
Why, we'd never have guessed it!" 

I tried to control myself, but would feel my ears burning 
treacherously, while tears of hurt sprang to my eyes. But Jamila, my 
djene, understood me. Holding back the laughter that was bubbling up 
inside of her and assuming a serious expression, she would ask saucily: 

"And do you think that a djene is to be had for the asking? Maybe 
that's how it is where you come from, but not here! Come on, kichine 
bala, we won't pay any attention to them!" And, showing off before the 
young men, Jamila would throw back her head arrogantly, shrug in 
defiance, and smile to herself as we walked off together. 

There was both annoyance and pleasure in that smile. Perhaps she 
was thinking: "Silly boy! If ever I wish, do you think anyone will be 
able to hold me back? The whole family could spy on me, but I'd still 
do as I please!" At such times I was contritely silent. Yes, I was jealous 
of .Jamila, I worshipped her, I was proud that she was my djene, I was 
proud of her beauty and her independent, reckless nature. We were the 
best of friends and had no secrets from each other. 

During the war years there were very few men left in the village. 
Taking advantage of this, some youths behaved quite insolently, 
treating the women with scorn, as if to say: "Why bother with them, if 
all you have to do is wag a finger to have anyone you want come 
running?" 

Once at haying, Osmon, our distant relative, began to get fresh with 
Jamila. He was one of those who thought no woman could resist him. 
Jamila pushed his hand away angrily and rose from the ground where 
she had been resting in the shade of a haystack. 

"Leave me alone!" she said dismally and turned away. "Though 
what can one expect from young stallions like you!" 



Osmon lay sprawled beneath the haystack, his moist lips curled 
back scornfully. 

"A cat will always scorn the meat that's hanging too high. Why are 
you playing hard-to-get? I'll bet you're only too eager, so why be high 
and mighty about it?" 

Jamila spun round. 

"Maybe I am! But that's our lot, and you're a fool if you can think 
of nothing better to do than laugh. I'll be a soldier's grass widow for a 
hundred years and still won't ever want to spit on the likes of you— you 
sicken me! If not for the war, I'd like to see who'd even look at you!" 

"That's what I say! It's wartime, and you're going crazy here 
without your husband's whip!" Osmon smirked. "Ah, if you were my 
woman, you'd talk differently." 

Jamila was about to jump at him, but she said nothing, realising 
that he was not worth quarrelling with. Her look was full of hatred. 
Then, spitting in disgust, she picked up her pitchfork and stalked off. 

I was on a wagon behind the haystack. When Jamila saw me, she 
turned away sharply, understanding the state I was in. I felt as though I, 
and not she, had been insulted, I had been disgraced. I reproached her, 
distressed. 

"Why do you have anything to do with such people? Why do you 
even talk to them?" 

Jamila was as black as a cloud the rest of the day. She did not speak 
to me and did not laugh as always. When I drove the wagon up to her, 
she swung her pitchfork into a stack, lifted it and carried it ahead of 
her, hiding her face in order to prevent me from speaking of the terrible 
hurt she was concealing. She would thrust the stack into the wagon and 
hurry back for another. The wagon filled up quickly. As I drove off, I 
turned back and saw her, lost in thought, leaning dejectedly on the fork 
handle. Then, with a start, she resumed her work. 

After we had loaded the last wagon, Jamila stood looking at the 
sunset for a long while, seeking to have forgotten everything else in the 
world. There, beyond the river, at the very edge of the Kazakh steppe, 
the languid harvest sun blazed like the mouth of a burning tandyr. It 
was sinking slowly beyond the horizon, touching the loose clouds with 
crimson and casting its last rays on the purple steppe, already shaded in 
the dells with the blue of early twilight. Jamila looked at the sunset, 
enraptured, as if she were witnessing a miracle. Her face was aglow 
with tenderness, her parted lips smiled gently, like a child's. And then, 
as if in answer to the unspoken reproaches still at the tip of my tongue, 



she turned and said, continuing our conversation, as it were: 

"Don't think about him, kichine bala, don't pay any attention to 
him! He isn't worth it." Jamila fell silent, watching the fading edge of 
the sun. Then, with a sign, she continued thoughtfully: "How can such 
as Osmon know what's in a person's soul? No one can know that. 
Perhaps there isn't one such a man in the whole world." 

While I was turning the horses round, Jamila ran off to a group of 
women, and I could hear their happy, ringing voices. It is difficult to 
explain the change that came over her— perhaps the sunset had put her 
mind at ease, or perhaps she felt happy after the day's work. I sat high 
on the hay wagon and looked at Jamila. She tore her white kerchief 
from her head and dashed after her girlfriend across the mowed field, 
her arms flung far apart, the wind flapping the hem of her dress. 
Suddenly I felt sad no longer. "Why think of silly old Osmon!" 
"Giddyap!" I cried, whipping the horses. 


That day I followed the team-leader's advice and waited for my 
father to come home and shave my head. Meanwhile, I sat down to 
answer my brother Sadyk's letter. Even in this there were unwritten 
laws: my brothers addressed their letters to my father, the village 
postman gave them to my mother, while it was my duty to read and 
answer them. Before even opening the letter, I knew exactly what 
Sadyk had written, since his letters were as alike as lambs in a flock. 
Sadyk always began with wishing good health to all, and then went on 
to say: "I'm sending this letter by mail to my relatives living in the 
sweet-smelling, blossoming land of Talas: to my dearly beloved, 
highly esteemed father Djolchubai. ..." Then he enumerated my 
mother, his mother and all the rest of us in strict order. There followed 
the indispensable questions about the health and well-being of all the 
aksakals of our tribe and our close relatives, and only in the very end, 
as if in haste, Sadyk would add: "And give my regards to my wife 
Jamila." 

Naturally, when one's father and mother are living, when the 
village is full of aksakals and close relatives, it is out of the question 
and even improper to mention one's wife first, to say nothing of 
addressing a letter to her. Not only Sadyk, but every self-respecting 
man was of the same opinion. This was never questioned, it was an 
established custom, and, far from being a topic for discussion, we 
never even stopped to wonder whether it was right or not. After all, 



each letter was such a long-awaited and happy event. 

My mother would make me read the letter several times. Then, 
with pious devotion, she would take the sheet of paper in her work- 
hardened hands, holding it as awkwardly as if it were a bird ready to 
fly away, and with difficulty her stiff fingers would finally fold the 
letter into a triangle. 

"Ah, my dear ones, we shall preserve your letters like a talisman!" 
she would say in a voice quivering with tears. "He asks how his father 
and mother and relatives are. What ever can happen to us? We're at 
home, in our native village! But how are you there? Just send us a 
single word saying that you're alive. That's all, we don't need anything 
more than that." 

My mother would gaze at the triangle for a long while. Then she 
would put it in a little leather pouch together with the other letters and 
lock it away in the trunk. 

If Jamila happened to be home at the time, she was permitted to 
read the letter. I noticed that she always blushed as she picked up the 
triangle. She scanned the lines greedily, but as she read on, her 
shoulders sagged and the fire slowly drained from her cheeks. 

Frowning and leaving the last lines unread, she would return the letter 
to my mother with such cold indifference that it seemed she was 
merely returning something she had borrowed. 

My mother apparently understood her daughter-in-law in her own 
way and tried to cheer her: 

"What's the matter?" she would say, locking the trunk. "Look how 
depressed you are, instead of being happy! Do you think your 
husband's the only one who's gone away to be a soldier? You're not the 
only one in trouble. The whole nation is bleeding. You should bear up 
with the rest. Do you think there are girls who aren't lonely and don't 
miss their husbands? Be lonely if you like, but don't let it show, keep 
your feelings to yourself." 

Jamila said nothing, but her sad and stubborn expression seemed to 
say: "Oh, Mother, you don't understand a thing!" 

This time, as before, Sadyk's letter was postmarked "Saratov". He 
was in a hospital there. Sadyk wrote that with Allah's help he would be 
home by autumn. He had written of this before and we were all looking 
forward eagerly to the coming reunion. 

In the end, I did not remain at home that day, but went to the 
threshing-floor where I usually slept at night. I took the horses to graze 
in a meadow of lucerne and hobbled them. The chairman of the 



collective farm did not permit us to let our cattle graze in the lucerne, 
but I violated this rule, because I wanted my horses to be well-fed. I 
knew of a secluded spot in the dell and, besides, no one would notice 
anything at night. This time, when I unhitched the horses and led them 
to the meadow, I saw that someone had already put four horses out to 
pasture there. I was indignant. After all, I was the master of a two- 
horse trap and this gave me the right to be indignant. Without a 
moment's hesitation, I decided to chase off the strange horses and teach 
the scoundrel who had infringed upon my territory a lesson. Suddenly, 

I recognised two of Daniyar's horses. He was the very same fellow 
whom the team-leader had spoken of that day. Since he and I were to 
work together beginning next morning, I left his horses alone and 
returned to the threshing-floor. 

I found Daniyar there. He had just finished oiling the wheels of his 
trap and was now tightening the spokes. 

"Daniyar, are those your horses in the dell?" I asked. He turned his 
head slowly. 

"Two are." 

"What about the other pair?" 

"That's what' s-her-name's, Jamila's horses. Who is she, your 
djene?" 

"Yes." 

"The team-leader himself left them here and asked me to keep an 
eye on them." 

What luck that I hadn't chased them away! 

Night fell, and the evening breeze from the mountains settled 
down. Everything was still at the threshing-floor. Daniyar lay down 
beside me under a stack of straw, but a short while later he rose and 
walked over to the river. He stopped at the edge of the high bank and 
remained standing there with his back to me, his hands behind him and 
his head tilted to one side. His long, angular body .jutted out sharply in 
the soft moonlight, as if roughly-hewn. It was as though he was 
listening intently to the sounds of the water on the rapids, so clear and 
distinct in the night. Perhaps he was listening to sounds and 
whisperings I could not hear. "I bet he's decided to spend the night on 
the bank again!" I thought and smirked. 

Daniyar was a newcomer to our village. One day a boy had come 
running to the field, shouting that a wounded soldier was in the village 
but that he did not know who he was or where he was from. The 
excitement that followed! When someone returned from the front every 



last person would run to have a look at the new arrival, to shake his 
hand and ask him if he had seen any relatives, to hear the latest news. 
This time the shouting was indescribable. Each one wondered: 

"Perhaps our brother's returned, or maybe an in-law?" The mowers all 
raced back to the village to see who the man was. 

Daniyar, we were to learn, really belonged to our village. They said 
he had been left an orphan while still a child and had been passed from 
house to house for about three years until he had finally gone to live 
with the Kazakhs in the Chakmak Steppe, since his relatives on his 
mother's side were Kazakhs. The boy had no close relations in our 
village to claim him, and soon he was forgotten. When they asked him 
how he had lived after he had left his native village, Daniyar answered 
evasively, but it was clear he had had his share of sorrow and had 
drunk full the orphan's bitter cup. Life had chased him like a rolling 
stone. For a long time he had herded sheep in the Chakmak salt 
marshes; when he was older he had dug canals in the desert, worked on 
the new state cotton farms and in the Angren mines near Tashkent, 
from where he had finally been called up. 

The people approved of Daniyar coming back to his native village. 
They said: "No matter how much he's wandered in strange places, he's 
finally returned, and that means it's his fate to drink water from his 
native spring. He hasn't forgotten his language and speaks well, though 
he uses Kazakh words at times." 

"Tulpar will find his own herd even if it's at the other end of the 
world. A person's native land and people are always closest to his 
heart. Good for you to have come back. We're pleased, and so are the 
spirits of your ancestors. With Allah's help, we'll finish off the 
Germans and live in peace again, and you'll have a family like 
everyone else, and the smoke will rise from your own hearth, too!" the 
old aksakals said. 

In tracing back Daniyar's ancestry, they determined his kin. Thus, a 
new "relative"— Daniyar— appeared in our village. 

Then Orozmat brought this tall, stoop- shouldered, limping soldier 
to the field. With his greatcoat thrown over his shoulder he walked 
quickly, trying not to fall behind Orozmat' s small paces. Next to tall 
Daniyar, our short and bouncing team-leader reminded us of a restless 
river snipe. The boys laughed to see them side by side. 

Daniyar's wound had not yet healed and his leg was still stiff; that 
meant he couldn't be a mower. He was appointed to tend the mowing 
machines with us boys. To tell the truth, we didn't like him. First of all. 



we didn't like his reserve. Daniyar said very little, and if he did, one 
had the feeling that he was thinking of something else that had nothing 
to do with what he was saying, that he was taken up with his own 
thoughts. You never knew whether he saw you or not, though he was 
looking straight at you with his thoughtful, dreamy eyes. 

"Poor fellow, he can't come to himself after being at the front!" 
they said. 

Strangest of all, considering this constant state of reverie, Daniyar 
worked quickly and skilfully, and at first glance one would take him 
for a genial and frank sort of person. Perhaps his unhappy childhood 
had taught him to conceal his thoughts and emotions and had made him 
so reserved. Quite possibly. 

Daniyar's thin lips with the hard lines at the corners of his mouth 
were always pressed tightly together, his eyes were sad and grave, and 
only his quick eyebrows gave life to his drawn, tired face. At times he 
would suddenly grow alert, as though hearing something inaudible to 
us, and then his eyebrows would shoot up and his eyes would burn 
with a strange fire. A smile of joy would linger on his face for a long 
while after. We all thought this very strange; he had other peculiarities 
as well. In the evenings we would unhitch our horses and gather by the 
tent, waiting for the cook to prepare our supper, but Daniyar would 
climb the look-out hill and stay there till dark. 

"What's he doing there, standing guard or something?" we'd laugh. 

Once, to satisfy my curiosity, I followed him up the hill. There was 
nothing extraordinary there. The steppe, lilac in the twilight, stretched 
to the mountain range on the far horizon. The dark, dim fields seemed 
to be dissolving slowly in the stillness. 

Daniyar paid no attention to me. He sat hugging his knees, gazing 
thoughtfully into the distance. Once again I felt he was listening 
intently to sounds I could not hear. Now and again he would start and 
become rigid, his eyes would open wide. Something was bothering 
him, and I thought that he was about to rise and throw open his soul, 
but not to me— he didn't even notice me— to something great, vast and 
unknown to me. But when I looked at him a moment later I did not 
recognise him: Daniyar sat limply and glumly, as if he were merely 
resting after the long day's work. 

The hayfields of our collective farm lie in the floodlands of the 
Kurkureu River. Near our village the river escapes from a canyon, 
rushing down the valley in an unleashed, raging torrent. The time of 
haying is the flood-time of the mountain rivers. The muddy, foaming 



water would begin to rise towards evening. At midnight I would 
awaken in the tent from the river's terrible heaving and see the stars of 
the blue, calm night peeping in; the wind came in cold, sudden blasts; 
the earth slept, and the raging river seemed to be advancing on us 
menacingly. Though we were not too near the bank, I could sense the 
water's closeness and was gripped by an involuntary fear of suddenly 
seeing the tent torn down and washed away. My comrades slept the 
dead sleep of mowers, but I was restless and would go outside. 

Night in the Woodlands of the Kurkureu is both beautiful and 
frightening. The dark shapes of hobbled horses can be seen here and 
there in the meadows. They have had their fill of the dewy grass and 
now doze warily, snorting softly. Past them, bending the whipped, wet 
rose-willows, the Kurkureu rolls its stones along with a hollow sound. 
The restless river fills the night with weird, fierce sounds. 

On nights such as those I always thought of Daniyar. He usually 
slept in a haystack at the water's edge. Wasn't he afraid? Didn't the 
noise of the river deafen him? Could he actually sleep there? Why did 
he spend his nights alone on the river bank? What force drew him 
there? He was a strange man, a man from another world. Where was he 
now? I looked around, but could see no one. The banks receded into 
the distance as sloping hills, and the mountain range loomed in the 
darkness. There, on the peaks, all was silence and stars. 

One would think Daniyar should have made friends in the village 
by then. But he was alone as before, as if he knew not the meaning of 
such words as friendship or enmity, sympathy or envy. In the villages 
to be recognised as a djigit one must be able to stand up for himself 
and his friends, to do good and at times even evil, to take things in 
hand at a feast or a wake on an equal footing with aksakals and then he 
will be noticed by the women. 

But if a person is like Daniyar and keeps to himself, taking no part 
in the everyday affairs of the village, then people will either ignore him 
or say condescendingly: 

"He does neither good nor evil. The poor fellow just stumbles 
along, so let him be." 

As a rule, such a person is the butt of all jokes or an object of pity. 
We youths striving to appear older than we were, to be treated as 
equals by the true djigits, always laughed at Daniyar behind his back, 
not daring to do so to his face. We even laughed at the fact that he 
himself washed his army shirt in the river. He would wash it and then 
put it on while it was still damp, for he had no other. 



Strangely, though Daniyar appeared mild and reserved, we never 
dared to treat him with undue familiarity, and not because he was older 
than we were— what were three or four years' difference?— and not 
because he was harsh or conceited, which at times evokes something 
akin to respect. No, there was something unapproachable in his silent, 
gloomy thoughtfulness; this held us back, though we were always glad 
of an opportunity to make fun of someone. 

I believe a certain incident was responsible for our restrained 
attitude towards him. I was a very curious lad and often annoyed 
people with my endless questions. My great passion was to ask the 
demobilised soldiers all about the war. When Daniyar came to work 
with us I kept looking for a chance to find something out from the 
former soldier. 

One evening after work we were sitting around the camp-fire, 
resting after supper. 

"Daniyar, tell us about the war before we go to sleep," I asked. 

At first, he said nothing and even seemed to be offended. He gazed 
long into the fire and finally raised his head to look at us. 

"About the war?" he asked. Then, as if answering his own thoughts, 
he added gruffly: "No, it's best you know nothing of war!" 

He turned away, scooped up an armful of dry leaves, threw them on 
the fire and began blowing on them without looking at us. 

Daniyar said no more, but even the few words he did say made us 
realise that war was not a subject one could talk about so lightly, that it 
was not a bed-time story. The war had dried in a bloody clot deep in 
the man's heart and it was not easy for him to speak of it. I was 
ashamed of myself, and never again did I question him about the war. 

However, we quickly forgot that evening, just as quickly as the 
village lost interest in Daniyar himself. 

Early next morning Daniyar and I brought the horses to the 
threshing-floor. Jamila was soon in coming. Spying us from afar, she 
shouted: 

"Hey, kichine bala, bring my horses over here! Where's the 
harness?" And she began to inspect the traps closely, as if she had been 
a driver all her life, kicking the wheels to see if the bushing was in 
order. 

As we drove up she found our appearance to be quite amusing. 
Daniyar's long, lanky legs dangled in a pair of enormously wide 
tarpaulin boots that seemed ready to slip off at any moment, while I 
urged my horse on by kicking my calloused heels into its sides. 



"What a fine pair you make!" she said, tossing her head gaily. The 
next moment she began ordering us about: "Hurry! We've got to cross 
the steppe before the heat sets in! 

She took a firm hold of the bridles, led the horses to the trap and 
began hitching them up. She did it too, and only once did she ask me to 
show her how to adjust the reins. She took no notice of Daniyar, as if 
he were not there at all. 

Daniyar appeared stunned by her resolute, defiant air, by her self- 
confidence. As he stood there pressing his lips together tightly, his look 
was unfriendly, yet one of concealed admiration. He lifted a sack of 
grain from the scales and carried it over to the trap in silence. Jamila 
began to scold him: 

"Do you think we'll all work by ourselves? No, my friend, that 
won't do. Here, give me your hand! What are you gaping at, kichine 
bala? Get on the trap and arrange the sacks!" 

Jamila grabbed Daniyar's hand. When they hoisted a sack on 
bended arms the poor fellow blushed from embarrassment. And then, 
each time they carried up a sack, grasping each other's wrists tightly, 
their heads nearly touching, I saw how terribly ill-at-ease he was, how 
nervously he bit his lips, how he tried not to look into Jamila's face. 

But it didn't bother her a bit. She seemed not to notice her helper and 
joked with the woman at the scales. Then, when the traps were loaded 
and we picked up the reins, she winked slyly and said with a laugh. 

"Hey, you, what' s-your-name! Daniyar? Since you look like a man, 
you might as well lead the way!" 

Daniyar jerked the reins and was off. "You poor soul," I thought. 
"Why, to top everything— you're bashful!" 

The journey ahead was a long one: fifteen miles over the steppe, 
then through the canyon to the station. The only good thing about it 
was that the road was a continual downward slope and it was easy on 
the horses. 

Our village was situated along the bank of the Kurkureu, on a slope 
of the Great Mountains. The village with its dark tree-tops remains in 
sight all the way to the canyon. 

We only made one trip a day. We'd leave early in the morning and 
reach the station after noon. 

The sun beat down mercilessly, and there was such a crush at the 
station that it was difficult to make your way through: there were traps 
and wagons piled high with sacks that had come from all over the 
valley, there were mules and oxen bringing their loads from the far-off 



mountain collective farms. They were driven in by boys and soldiers' 
wives, black with sunburn, wearing faded clothes, their, bare feet 
calloused from the stony roads, their lips cracked till they bled from the 
heat and the dust. 

At the grain elevator was a large slogan: "Every ear of corn to the 
front!" The commotion, jostling and shouting of the drivers in the yard 
was indescribable. Close by, behind a low wall, a locomotive was 
manoeuvring into position, throwing out tight knots of hot steam and 
giving off a smell of burnt slag. Trains thundered by. Camels reluctant 
to get up from the ground bellowed desperately, angrily opening wide 
their saliva-filled months. 

The mountains of grain at the receiving station were piled high 
beneath a red-hot iron roof. The sacks had to be carried along sloping 
wooden planks right under the roof. The air was heavy with the smell 
of grain, and the dust was choking. 

"Hey, you! Watch your step!" the receiving agent with red-rimmed 
eyes from lack of sleep shouted from below. "Take them up, way up to 
the top!" He shook his fist and cursed. 

Why was he cursing? We knew where to take them and we'd get 
them there. After all, we had carried the sacks from the very fields 
where women, old men and children had planted the wheat and reaped 
it, and now, at the height of the harvesting season, the combine 
operator was struggling with the old machine that had long since 
outlived its usefulness, where the women's backs were always bent 
over their scorching sickles, where children's hands carefully collected 
each dropped ear of corn. 

I still remember how heavy those sacks were. It was a job for a 
powerful man. I trudged onwards, balancing on the squeaking, sagging 
boards, a corner of the sack clamped tightly between my teeth to help 
me carry it, to keep from dropping it. My throat itched from the dust, 
my ribs ached from the weight, and fiery circles danced before my 
eyes. Many were the times when I'd begin to feel dizzy, knowing there 
was no stopping the sack from slipping; my one thought would be to 
let go of it and go tumbling down after it. But there were others behind 
me. They were also carrying sacks, they were young boys my age or 
soldiers' wives who had boys like me. If not for the war, who would 
ever have permitted them to carry such loads? No, I had no right to 
retreat when women were doing the same work as 1 . 

There was Jamila ahead of me; her skirt was tucked up above her 
knees and I could see the muscles strain on her beautiful tan legs, I 



could see what a great effort it was for her to keep her lithe body 
steady as she bent under the weight of the sack. She would sometimes 
halt for a second, as if sensing that I was becoming weaker with each 
successive step. 

"Chin up, kichine bala, we're nearly there!" 

But her own voice sounded hollow and lifeless. 

When we had emptied our sacks and turned back, we would see 
Daniyar coming up. He limped slightly as he walked along the planks 
in a strong, measured step. As we'd come abreast of him, Daniyar 
would cast a dark and burning look at Jamila. She would straighten her 
tired back and pull down her wrinkled dress. Each time he looked at 
her as if he were seeing her for the first time, Jamila continued to 
ignore him. 

It had become a pattern: depending on her mood, Jamila either 
laughed at him or ignored him completely. We could be riding along, 
when she'd suddenly shout to me: "Come on, let's go!" With a whoop 
and swinging the whip over her head, she'd start the horses at a gallop. 

I would follow. We would overtake Daniyar, smothering him in a 
heavy cloud of dust which took long to settle on the road again. 

Though this was done in jest, few men would have tolerated it. But 
Daniyar seemed not to mind. We'd thunder by while he looked with 
unsmiling admiration at the laughing Jamila, standing erect in the trap. 
As I turned back, I would see him gazing at her through the dust. There 
was something kind and all-forgiving in his look, yet I sensed a 
stubborn, hidden sadness. 

Neither by poking fun at him, nor by ignoring him did she ever 
make him lose his temper. It was as if he had vowed to bear it all. At 
first I felt sorry for him and often reproached Jamila: "Why do you 
make fun of him, djene? He's so quiet and meek!" 

"Oh!" she would laugh and shrug. "It's all in fun, and nothing will 
ever happen to such a crab!" 

Soon I, too, began to make jokes at his expense. His strange, 
insistent looks worried me. How he stared as she hoisted a sack on her 
back! True enough, amidst the noise, the jostling and the market-place 
commotion of the receiving station, with people hoarse from shouting, 
dashing back and forth, Jamila's confident, calculated movements and 
light step, attracted attention, making it seem as if she were somewhere 
beyond the confines of the yard. 

It was difficult not to stop and look at her. In order to take a sack 
from the edge of the trap, Jamila would stretch up and turn, thrusting 



her shoulders forward and throwing her head back in a way that bared 
her beautiful neck and made her sun-reddened braids nearly touch the 
ground. Daniyar would stop, as if to rest, but his eyes followed her to 
the very door. He surely thought that no one noticed him, but I saw 
everything and disliked what I saw; I even felt insulted, for I could 
never consider Daniyar worthy of Jamila. 

"Just think of it, even he stares at her— then what can you expect 
from the others!" I fumed. The childish egoism I had not yet outgrown 
flared up in terrible jealousy. Children always resent their loved ones 
paying attention to outsiders. Now, instead of feeling sorry for 
Daniyar, I disliked him so intensely, I was happy when anyone made 
fun of him. 

However, our jokes once ended quite unfortunately. Among the 
grain sacks there was a huge 280 -pound one, made of coarse, raw 
wool. We usually carried it together, as it was far too heavy to carry 
alone. One day at the threshing-floor we decided to play a trick on 
Daniyar. We dumped this huge sack into his trap and piled other sacks 
on top of it. On the way, Jamila and I stopped off in a Russian village 
and picked some apples in someone's orchard. We laughed all the way 
and she threw apples at him. Then, as usual, we overtook him, raising a 
cloud of dust. He caught up with us beyond the canyon at the railroad 
crossing, for the barrier was down. From there we drove to the station 
together. We had completely forgotten about the huge sack and did not 
think about it until we were through unloading. Jamila nudged me 
mischievously and nodded towards Daniyar. He was standing in the 
trap, looking at the sack with some concern, apparently trying to decide 
what to do with it. Then he looked round, and when he noticed Jamila 
hiding a smile, he blushed, realising what was up. 

"Pull your pants up, or you'll lose them on the way!" Jamila 
shouted. 

Daniyar looked at us angrily; then, before we had time to realise 
what he was doing, he pulled the sack along the bottom of the trap, set 
it on the edge, jumped down and, steadying it with one hand, lowered it 
onto his back. He started walking. At first we made believe there was 
nothing so special about what he was doing. The others certainly 
noticed nothing: there was a man carrying a sack— but so was everyone 
else. When Daniyar approached the gangway, Jamila caught up with 
him. 

"Let go of the sack, I was just fooling!" 

"Go away!" he muttered and stepped onto the planks. 



"Look, he's carrying it!" Jamila cried, as if trying to .justify herself. 
She was still laughing softly, but her laughter, was strained, it was as if 
she were forcing herself to laugh. 

We noticed that Daniyar was beginning to limp more markedly. 
Why hadn't we thought of that before? To this day I cannot forgive 
myself for that foolish prank. It was I, idiot that I was, who had thought 
of it! 

"Come back!" Jamila shouted, her strange laughter a hollow sound. 
But Daniyar could not turn back: there were others close behind him. 

I can't seem to recall clearly what happened after, that. I saw 
Daniyar, bent double under the tremendous weight, his head low, his 
teeth sunk into his lip. He trudged on slowly, moving his wounded leg 
with care. Each new step apparently caused him such pain that his head 
jerked back and he would stop for a second. The higher he climbed, the 
more he swayed. The sack made him stagger. My mouth went dry from 
fright and shame. Frozen with fear, every fibre of my body felt the 
weight of his burden and the unbearable pain in his wounded leg. He 
lurched again, jerked his head back and everything swain before my 
eyes; everything went black, the earth moved from under my feet. 

I came to my senses with a start from a steel-like grip on my hand. 

I did not immediately recognise Jamila. She was as white as a sheet, 
her pupils were dilated, her lips still twitched from her recent laughter. 
By then everyone else, including the receiving agent, had rushed to the 
foot of the gangway. Daniyar took two more steps. He tried to adjust 
the sack, and then suddenly began to sink to one knee. Jamila covered 
her face. 

"Let go! Let go of the sack!" she screamed. 

But Daniyar would not let go of it, though he could have certainly 
let it slip over the side, in order not to fell those behind him. At the 
sound of Jamila's voice, he lurched forward, straightened his leg, took 
another step, and began to sway again. 

"Let go of it, you son-of-a-bitch!" the receiving agent bellowed. 

"Let go!" everyone shouted. 

Once again Daniyar stood his ground. 

"No, he won't let go!" someone whispered with conviction. 

Everyone there, both those behind him and those below, realised 
that he would not let go unless he himself toppled over together with it. 
There was a dead silence. The locomotive beyond the wall whistled 
shrilly. 

Daniyar trudged onwards, swaying like one in a trance, onwards, 



towards the red-hot iron roof, up the sagging boards of the gangway. 
He stopped every two steps to regain his balance; gathering his 
strength, he continued on up. Those behind fell in step and stopped 
when he did. This exhausted them, it drained their last ounce of 
strength, but no one was angry, no one cursed. They trudged onwards 
with their burdens, as if tied together by an invisible rope, as if they 
were treading a dangerous, slippery path, where the life of one 
depended upon the life of another. There was a single heavy rhythm in 
their silence and monotonous swaying. One step, another step behind 
Daniyar, and yet another. 

There was just a little left to go, but Daniyar swayed again, his 
wounded leg would no longer obey him. He would certainly fall if he 
didn't let go of the sack. 

"Run! Support it from behind!" Jamila cried to me, stretching forth 
her arms helplessly, as if this could somehow help him. 

I dashed up the gangway. Elbowing my way through people and 
sacks, I finally reached him. He looked at me from under his arm. The 
veins throbbed on his dark, wet forehead, his bloodshot eyes burned 
through me with hate. I wanted to support the sack from behind. 

"Go 'way!" he snapped and moved on. 

When he finally came panting and limping down, his arms hung 
loosely by his sides. The people parted to let him pass, but the 
receiving agent could not control himself and shouted: 

"Are you mad? Don't you think I'm human? Don't you think I'd 
have let you empty the sack down below? Why do you carry such 
sacks?" 

"That's my business," Daniyar answered quietly. 

He spat to a side and walked towards the trap. We did not dare raise 
our eyes and were ashamed and angry at Daniyar for having taken our 
foolish prank so seriously. 

We rode in silence all night long. Since this was Daniyar's natural 
state, we couldn't tell whether he was still angry at us or whether he 
had forgotten the entire incident. But we were conscience- stricken and 
wretched. 

Next morning, as we were loading grain at the threshing-floor, 
Jamila grabbed the ill-fated sack, stepped firmly on one edge, and 
ripped it apart. 

"Here, take your old rag!" she said, tossing it at the surprised 



weigher's feet. "And tell the team-leader not to slip us any more like 
it!" 

"What's the matter with you? What happened?" 

"Nothing!" 

All the next day Daniyar behaved as quietly and calmly as ever, in 
no way expressing his feelings, though his limp was more marked, and 
especially so when he carried a sack. His old wound had apparently re- 
opened; it was a constant reminder of our guilt. Nevertheless, if he had 
laughed or joked, it would have put an end to the strain. Jamila, too, 
pretended that nothing unusual had happened. A proud girl, she 
laughed as always, but I saw how ill-at-ease she was. 

It was late as we journeyed home from the station. Daniyar rode on 
ahead. The night was magnificent. Who does not know these August 
nights with their far-off, yet so close, gleaming stars! There was one 
star: it seemed frozen round the edges, its icy rays sparkled as it looked 
down from the dark sky in surprise at the earth below. I gazed at it as 
we rode through the canyon. The horses, eager to be home, trotted 
briskly and gravel crunched under the wheels. The wind from the 
steppe brought the bitter smell of flowering wormwood, the faint 
aroma of cooling ripe wheat, and all this, mingling with the smell of tar 
and horses' sweat, made our heads light. 

To one side dark briar-covered cliffs hung over the road; to the 
other, from far below, from the thicket of rose- willow and young 
poplars, the restless Kurkureu rushed on. Now and then a train would 
thunder over the far bridge; the clatter of its wheels would trail it long 
after it had vanished in the distance. 

It was good to ride in the coolness, to watch the moving backs of 
the horses, to listen to the sound of the August night and breathe in its 
smells. Jamila rode ahead of me. She had let go of the reins and was 
looking about as she sang softly. I knew our silence hung heavily on 
her. It was impossible to be silent on such a night— it was a night made 
for singing. 

And she began to sing. Perhaps she sang because she was seeking a 
way to return the former easy spirit of our relationship and because she 
wanted to dispel her feeling of guilt. She had a ringing, mischievous 
voice, and she sang the usual village songs: "I'll wave my kerchief as 
you pass", and "My beloved has gone far away". She knew many songs 
and sang them simply and with feeling, making it pleasant to listen to 
her. Suddenly, she stopped and hailed Daniyar: 

"Hey, Daniyar, why don't you sing something? Aren't you a 



djigit?" 

"You sing, Jamila," he answered in some confusion, holding back 
his horses. "I'm listening. I'm all ears." 

"Don't you think we have ears, too? Nobody's forcing you, you 
don't have to if you don't want to!" And Jamila began to sing again. 

Who knows why she had asked him to sing! Perhaps it was just a 
whim, or perhaps she wanted to draw him into a conversation? It was 
probably the latter, for soon she shouted again: 

"Tell me, Daniyar, were you ever in love?" And she laughed. 

He said nothing. Jamila also fell silent. 

"She certainly found the right person to ask for a song!" I thought. 

The horses slowed down at the little river that crossed the road. 
Their hooves clattered over the wet, silvery stones. When we had 
passed the ford, Daniyar whipped his horses and suddenly began to 
sing in a strained voice that broke at every bump in the road: 

My mountains, my blue-white mountains, 

The land of my fathers and grandfathers. 

Then he faltered, coughed and sang the next two lines in a deep, 
slightly hoarse baritone: 

My mountains, my blue-white mountains, 

My cradle of life. . . 

Here he stopped again, as if frightened by something, and fell 
silent. 

I imagined his embarrassment quite vividly. However, there was 
something deeply moving in this halting, timid singing, and he 
probably had a very good voice: it was difficult to believe that it was 
Daniyar. 

"Well, well!" I exclaimed. 

"Why didn't you ever sing before? Sing! Sing as you really can!" 
Jamila cried. 

It was light ahead, there the canyon ended. A breeze was blowing 
from the valley. Daniyar began to sing again. He began as timidly and 
uncertainly as before, but gradually his voice gained volume, it filled 
the canyon, resounding and echoing from the far-off cliffs. 

I was most amazed by the passion and fire of the song. I did not 
know what to call it and do not know now; rather, I cannot determine 
whether it was the voice alone or something bigger, something that 
came from the soul, something capable of arousing the same emotion 



in another, capable of bringing to life one's innermost thoughts. 

If I were only able to re-create in some way Daniyar's song! There 
were hardly any words to it, but without words it revealed a big human 
heart. Neither before nor after did I ever hear such a song: it was 
neither Kirghiz nor Kazakh, but there was something of both in it. 
Daniyar had combined the best melodies of the two related peoples and 
had curiously woven them into a never-to-be-repeated pattern. This 
was a song of the mountains and steppes, now soaring like the Kirghiz 
mountains, now vast and rolling like the Kazakh steppes. 

As I listened I became more and more amazed: 

"So that's what Daniyar is really like! Who would have ever 
believed it?" 

We were crossing the steppe along the soft, beaten road. Daniyar's 
voice soared, ever new melodies followed one another with astounding 
grace. Was he so gifted? What had happened to him? It was as if he 
had been waiting for this day, for this hour to come! 

And suddenly I understood his strangeness which made people 
shrug and smile— his dreaminess, his love of solitude, his silences. I 
understood why he spent his evenings on the look-out hill and his 
nights alone on the river bank, why he was constantly listening to 
sounds inaudible to others, and why his eyes would suddenly sparkle 
and his usually drawn eyebrows twitch. This was a person who was 
deeply in love. And I felt that this was not merely love for another 
person; this was different, it was a tremendous love— of life, of the 
earth. Yes, he kept this love within himself, in his music— it was his 
guiding light. An indifferent person could never have sung as he did, 
no matter how great his voice. 

When it seemed that the last note had died away, a new, haunting 
wave seemed to waken the dozing steppe, and it listened gratefully to 
the singer whose dear, native melody was like a caress. The ripe, 
yellow ash-wheat awaiting harvesting rippled like the surface of a lake, 
and the first shadows of dawn darted over the field. A mighty regiment 
of old willows at the mill rustled their leaves, beyond tile river tile 
camp-fires of the field workers were dying down, and a shadowy rider 
was galloping silently along the river bank towards the village, now 
disappearing among the orchards, now reappearing again. The wind 
was heavy with the smell of apples, the warm, milk-like scent of 
flowering maize and the smell of drying dung bricks. 

Daniyar sang on and on, oblivious to everything, while the 
enchanted August night listened to him in silence. Even the horses had 



long since changed to a walk, as if afraid to break the spell. 

Abruptly, on the highest ringing note, Daniyar broke off his song, 
whooped, and whipped his horses. I thought Jamila would gallop after 
him and was ready to follow her, but she did not move. She remained 
sitting with her head inclined, as if listening to the last tremulous notes 
drifting in the air. Daniyar rode off. Neither of us said a word until we 
reached the village. There was no need to talk, for words cannot always 
express all one feels. 

It seemed that from that day on a change came over our lives. It 
was as if I was forever waiting for something wonderful and much 
desired to happen. In the mornings we would load our traps at the 
threshing-floor, ride to the station, and hurry to be off again, in order to 
listen to Daniyar's singing on the way home. His voice had become a 
part of me, it followed me everywhere, it was with me in the morning 
as I ran across the wet dewy lucerne to the hobbled horses, the 
laughing sun rolling out from behind the mountains to greet me. I 
heard his voice in the soft rustling of the golden rain of wheat, thrown 
up to the wind by the old winnowers, and in the graceful circling flight 
of the lonely hawk high above the steppe— in everything that I saw and 
heard I imagined Daniyar's singing. 

As we rode along the canyon in the evenings I felt I was being 
transported to another world. I would listen to him with my eyes half- 
closed, and there would arise before me the strangely familiar scenes I 
had known from childhood: now the soft, smoky-blue clouds of spring 
would float high above the tents; now herds of horses would gallop 
across the ringing earth to their summer pastures and the young 
stallions with long forelocks and wild black fire in their eyes would 
proudly overtake the mares; now flocks of sheep would slowly spread 
like lava over the hills; now a water-fall would dash down from a cliff, 
its white foaming water blinding; now the sun would set softly in the 
thicket of needle grass beyond the river and the lonely rider on the 
fiery edge of the horizon seemed in pursuit of it— he need only stretch 
his hand to touch the sun— and then he, too, would vanish in the thicket 
and the twilight. 

Wide is the Kazakh steppe beyond the river. It had spread the 
mountains apart to make room for itself and lay stark and desolate 
between them. 

That first memorable summer of war, fires had burned across the 
steppe, herds of army horses obscured it in clouds of hot dust and 
riders galloped off in all directions. I remember a Kazakh racing by 



along the opposite bank, shouting in a shepherd's guttural voice: 

"Kirghizes! Saddle your horses— the enemy has come!" then he 
disappeared in a cloud of dust and a wave of hot air. 

Everyone rose to meet the challenge: a solemn and thundering 
rumble accompanied our first cavalry divisions as they came down 
from the mountains and moved across the valleys. Thousands of 
stirrups jangled, thousands of djigits took to the saddle; ahead of them 
red banners waved on the colour staffs, behind, beyond the dust raised 
by the horses' hooves, the sorrowful and majestic wail of their mothers 
and wives throbbed and beat against the ground: "May the steppe 
protect you! May the spirit of our great warrior Manas protect you!" 

Bitter paths remained where the men had gone off to war. 

Daniyar's song had opened my eyes to this great world of earthly 
beauty and suffering. Where had he learned all this? Who had he heard 
it from? I felt that only a person who had longed for his native land for 
many years and who had suffered for this love could love it so. As he 
sang, I visualised him as a small boy, wandering along the roads of the 
steppe. Perhaps it was then that these songs of his native land had first 
awakened in his soul? Or was it when he had followed the fiery paths 
of war? 

His song made me want to lie down and embrace the earth, as a 
son, in gratitude that it was there, that one could love it so. It was then 
that I felt something new awakening inside of me, something I had no 
words for, something irresistible, a compulsion to express myself— yes, 
to express myself, not only to see and sense the world myself, but to 
make others see my vision, my thoughts and emotions, to tell people of 
the beauties of our earth as exaltedly as Daniyar could do. I would 
catch my breath at the fear and joy of something quite unknown, for I 
did not yet realise my calling in life was painting. 

I had always liked to draw. I would copy the illustrations in my 
textbooks, and the boys all said they were "perfect copies". The 
teachers praised my drawings for our wall newspaper. But when war 
broke out, my brothers were called up, I quit school and went to work 
on the collective farm, as did every other boy my age. I forgot all about 
paints and brushes and never thought I would think of them again. But 
Daniyar's songs had stirred my soul. I was in a daze, I looked at the 
world in bewilderment, as if I were seeing everything for the first time. 

As for Jamila, a great change had suddenly come over her. It was 
as if the lively, sharp-tongued laughing girl had never existed. A 
shimmering spring sadness clouded her misty eyes. She was constantly 



lost in thought on our long rides to the station. A vague, dreamy smile 
would touch her lips, and she would softly rejoice at something she 
alone was aware of. Many were the times when she'd stand with a 
heavy sack on her shoulders, suddenly gripped by a strange timidity, as 
if she were standing on the bank of a rushing current and did not know 
whether to cross it or not. She avoided Daniyar and would not look him 
straight in the face. 

Once, at the threshing-floor, Jamila said with a helpless annoyance: 

"Take off your shirt— I'll wash it for you." 

Then, after she had washed it in the river, she spread it out to dry and 
sat down beside it, smoothing out the wrinkles carefully, holding it up 
to the sun to see the worn shoulders, shaking her head and then 
smoothing it again softly and sadly. 

Only once did Jamila laugh loudly and infectiously as before, her 
eyes shining brightly as they used to. One day a noisy crowd of young 
women, girls and demobilised djigits turned in at the threshing-floor on 
their way home from stacking lucerne. 

"Hey, you bais, you're not the only ones who want to eat white 
bread! Give us some, or we'll throw you into the river!" the djigits 
shouted and thrust out their pitchforks jokingly. 

"You can't scare us! I'll find something for the girls, but you can 
fend for yourselves!" Jamila answered merrily. 

"If that's the case, we'll toss you all in!" 

The youths and girls began to wrestle. Shouting, screaming and 
laughing, they tried to push each other into the water. 

"Catch them! Pull them in!" Jamila laughed, shouting louder than 
the rest, skilfully evading her opponents. 

Strangely, the djigits had eyes only for Jamila. Each tried to catch 
her, to press her close. Suddenly, three youths grabbed her and carried 
her to the bank. 

"Kiss us, or we'll throw you in!" 

"Come on, let's swing her!" 

Jamila writhed and wriggled, she laughed and called to her girl- 
friends for help, but they were running wildly up and down the bank, 
fishing their kerchiefs out of the water. Jamila flew into the river to the 
merry laughter of the djigits. She emerged with streaming hair, more 
beautiful than ever. Her wet cotton dress hugged her body, 
accentuating her lovely round hips and young breasts, but she noticed 
nothing and laughed, swaying back and forth while streams of water 



trickled down her flushed face. 

"Kiss us!" the djigits persisted. 

Jamila kissed them, but again she flew into the water, and again she 
laughed, throwing back the heavy wet strands of hair from her face. 

Everyone at the threshing-floor roared with laughter at the young 
people's pranks. The old winnowers threw down their spades and 
wiped the tears from their eyes. The wrinkles on their dark faces shone 
with joy and with tile spirit of youth revived fleetingly. I, too, laughed 
heartily, forgetting for once my sacred duty to protect Jamila from the 
djigits. 

Daniyar alone was silent. I suddenly noticed him and also stopped 
laughing. He was a solitary figure at the edge of the threshing-floor, 
standing there with his feet planted far apart. I had a feeling that he 
wanted to rush forward and snatch Jamila away from the djigits. He 
stared at her, and his look was one of sadness and admiration in which 
there was both happiness and pain. Yes, Jamila's beauty was a source 
of happiness and grief to him. When the djigits pressed her close and 
forced her to kiss each in turn, he would lower his head and make as if 
to leave, but he would not. 

Meanwhile, Jamila had also noticed him. She immediately stopped 
laughing and hung her head. 

"That's enough fooling around!" she suddenly checked the 
boisterous djigits. 

One of them tried to embrace her. 

"Go away!" she said, shoving him back. She stole a guilty glance at 
Daniyar, then ran into the bushes to wring out her dress. 

There was much I could not understand in their relationship and, to 
tell the truth, I was afraid to think about it. Yet, I felt uneasy when I 
noticed Jamila was sad because she herself was avoiding Daniyar. It 
would have been better if she had laughed and made fun of him as 
before. At the same time, however, our trips back to the village at night 
to the sound of Daniyar' s singing inspired me with a strange feeling of 
happiness for them both. 

Jamila rode in the trap when we drove through the canyon, but she 
would walk alongside it in the steppe. I would, too, for it was nicer to 
walk along and listen. At first we would each follow our own trap, but 
soon, without noticing it, a strange force would draw us closer to 
Daniyar. We wanted to see the expression of his face and eyes— could 
the singer really be the glum, unsociable Daniyar! 

Each time I noticed that Jamila would be both stunned and touched, 



that she would slowly stretch her hand towards him, yet he would not 
see it, for he would be looking far off into the distance, his hands 
behind his head, swaying from side to side; then Jamila's hand would 
drop helplessly on the edge of the trap. She would start, jerk it back 
and stop walking. Standing there in the middle of the road, downcast 
and stunned, she would follow him with her eyes and then begin 
walking again. 

At times I would think that Jamila and I were both troubled by the 
same and equally unfathomable feeling. Perhaps the hour had struck, 
bringing to life a feeling that had long been lying latent in our souls? 

Jamila was still able to lose herself in her work, but during those 
rare moments of rest when we waited around at the threshing-floor, she 
was terribly restless. She would stand about near the winnowers; 
sometimes, after tossing several shovels full of wheat high up into the 
wind with an easy, graceful movement, she would suddenly throw 
down her spade and walk over to the stacks of straw. Here she would 
sit down in the shade and, as if afraid to be alone with herself, she 
would call me: 

"Come here, kichine bala! Let's sit here together for a while." 

I always expected her to tell me something important and explain 
what it was that was worrying her. But she said nothing. Putting my 
head in her lap silently and looking off into the distance, she would run 
her fingers through my bristly hair and gently stroke my face with hot, 
trembling hands. I looked up at her, at her face, so full of vague anxiety 
and yearning, and seemed to recognise myself in it. Something was 
tormenting her, something was gathering and ripening in her soul, 
demanding an outlet, and she was afraid of it. She painfully desired 
and, just as painfully, did not wish to admit to herself that she was in 
love, just as I did and did not want her to love Daniyar. After all, she 
was my parents' daughter-in-law, my brother's wife. 

But such thoughts were fleeting, I drove them from my mind. My 
greatest joy was to see her tender lips, half-parted as a child's, to see 
her tear-dimmed eyes. How lovely, how beautiful she was, how 
inspired and passionate was her face! I sensed this, but could not 
understand it at the time. Even now I often ask myself: perhaps love 
produces a feeling of inspiration similar to that experienced by an artist 
or a poet? Gazing at Jamila, I wanted to run into the. steppe and shout 
to the heavens and earth, asking them what to do to overcome the 
strange anxiety and joy that was in me. And once, I think, I found the 


answer. 



As usual, we were returning from the station. Night had fallen, the 
stars were like swarms of bees in the sky, the steppe was dropping off 
to sleep, and only Daniyar's song, breaking the stillness, rang out and 
faded in the soft, distant darkness. Jamila and I followed him. 

I don't know what came over Daniyar that night— there was such a 
deep, tender sadness, such loneliness in his voice that it brought tears 
of sympathy and compassion to our eyes. 

Jamila walked beside his trap, holding on to the side tightly, her 
head inclined. When Daniyar's voice soared again, she tossed her head, 
jumped into the trap and sat down beside him. She sat there as if made 
of stone, her hands folded across her chest. I walked alongside, 
hurrying forward a bit to have a better look at them. Daniyar continued 
to sing, talking no notice of Jamila. I saw her arms drop, she leaned 
towards him and laid her head lightly on his shoulder. For a moment, 
as a pacer feeling the whip changes his step, his voice wavered, only to 
resound with greater power than before. He was singing a song of love! 

I was astounded. The steppe seemed to blossom, it heaved, drawing 
apart the darkness, and I saw two lovers in its vast expanse. They did 
not see me, I did not exist. I walked beside them, watching them sway 
in rhythm to the song, oblivious to everything in the world. I did not 
recognise them. It was the same old Daniyar in his shabby soldier's 
shirt open at the throat, but his eyes seemed to burn in the darkness. It 
was my own Jamila pressing close to him, so subdued and timid, with 
teardrops shimmering on her lashes. These were two newly-born 
people, their happiness was unprecedented. And was this not 
happiness? Was not Daniyar imparting to her his great love for his 
native land, one which had created this inspired music? Yes, he was 
singing for her, he was singing of her. 

Once again I was overcome by the strange excitement which 
Daniyar's singing always aroused in me. Suddenly, I knew what I 
wanted. I wanted to paint them. 

I became frightened at my own thought, but my desire was greater 
than my fear. I would paint them exactly as they were— lost in 
happiness! Yes, exactly as they were right then! But would I be able to 
do it? Fear and joy caught my breath. I walked as one in a trance. I, 
too, was happy, for I did not yet know how much trouble this rash 
desire would cause me in the future. I told myself that one should see 
the earth as Daniyar saw it, that I would use colours to portray his 
song. I would also have mountains and steppe, people, grasses, clouds 
and rivers. Then the thought flashed through my mind: but where will I 



get the paints? They won't give me any in school, because they need 
them themselves! As if this were the main problem! 

Suddenly Daniyar broke off his song. Jamila had impetuously 
thrown her arms around him, but had drawn back immediately; she 
froze for a moment, moved away, and jumped down. Daniyar pulled at 
the reins hesitantly. The horses stopped. Jamila was standing in the 
road with her back towards him. Then she tossed her head, looked at 
him sideways, and said through her tears: 

"What are you looking at?" After a moment's pause, she added 
harshly: "Don't look at me, keep on going!" and went over to her own 
trap. "What are you gaping at?" she shouted at me. "Get in, and pick up 
your reins! Oh, you make me sick!" 

"What came over her?" I wondered, urging on the horses. It was 
not difficult to guess though: she was greatly distressed, for she was 
married and her husband was living, he was in a hospital in Saratov. I 
refused to puzzle it out. I was angry at her and angry at myself; 
perhaps, I would have really begun to hate her if I had known that 
Daniyar would sing no more, that I would never hear his voice again. 

My whole body ached, I could not wait to get back and fall into the 
hay. The trotting horses' backs joggled in the dark, the trap rattled 
unbearably, the reins kept slipping from my hands. 

Back at the threshing-floor I barely managed to pull off the harness 
and throw it under the trap. I collapsed in a heap as soon as I reached 
the hay. This time Daniyar led the horses out to pasture. 

Next morning I awoke with joy. I would paint Jamila and Daniyar. 

I closed my eyes tight and imagined exactly how I would portray them. 
All I needed was paint and brushes and I could begin. 

I ran to the river, washed and then ran to the hobbled horses. The 
cold, wet lucerne slapped loudly against my bare legs, it stung the 
cracked skin of my soles, but I felt wonderful. As I ran, I took note of 
everything that was going on around me. The sun was emerging from 
behind the mountains and a sunflower that had somehow taken root 
near the irrigation ditch stretched towards it. White-topped knapweed 
crowded round it greedily, but it stood firm, catching the morning sun, 
snatching it from them with its yellow tongues and nourishing its tight 
and heavy cap of seeds. There the water trickled down the wagon 
tracks where the wheels had churned up the mud at the crossing. There 
was a lavender island of fragrant, waist-high mint. I was running across 
my native soil, swallows raced on overhead— ah! If only I had the 
paints to capture the morning sun, the blue-white mountains, the dew- 



drenched lucerne, and the lonely sunflower growing at the edge of the 
ditch. 

When I returned to the threshing-floor, my happy mood was 
immediately clouded. I saw Jamila. She was depressed, her face was 
pinched, and there were dark rings under her eyes; she had probably 
spent a sleepless night. She neither smiled nor spoke to me, but when 
Orozmat appeared, Jamila went up to him and said: 

"Take your old trap back! Send me any place you want, but I won't 
deliver grain to the station any more!" 

"What's the matter, child? Did a horsefly bite you?" he asked in a 
surprised and kindly voice. 

"Horseflies bite calves! And don't ask me why! I said I won't go, 
and that's all there is to it!" 

The smile disappeared from Orozmat' s face. 

"I don't care what you want! You'll do your job all the same!" He 
banged his crutch on the ground. "If someone's offended you, tell me 
and I'll break this crutch over his head! But if not, stop playing the 
fool: it's soldiers' bread you're delivering, and your own husband is out 
there!" He turned sharply and hobbled away. 

Jamila was embarrassed, she blushed and then sighed softly as she 
looked at Daniyar. He stood off to a side with his back to her, 
tightening the hame- strap on the horse's collar with jerky movements. 
He had heard their conversation. For a while Jamila remained standing 
where she was, fingering her whip. Then she shrugged recklessly and 
walked towards her trap. 

That day we returned earlier than usual. Daniyar raced his horses 
all the way. Jamila was silent and gloomy, while I couldn't believe my 
eyes when I saw the scorched and blackened steppe before me. Why, 
only yesterday it had been so different. It was as if I had heard about it 
in a fairy-tale, and the picture of happiness that had awakened my 
consciousness would not leave me for a moment. I had grasped the 
brightest edge of life, recreating it in my imagination in its every detail 
until it alone enveloped my every thought. I could not rest until I had 
stolen a piece of heavy white paper from the weigher. I ran off and hid 
behind a haystack. There, with my heart thumping in my throat, I laid it 
on the smooth wooden back of a spade which I had picked up on my 
way. 

"The blessings of Allah be upon it!" I whispered, as my father had 
once done when putting me on a horse for the first time. Then I 
touched the paper with my pencil. These were my first untutored lines. 



But when Daniyar's features appeared on the sheet, I forgot everything 
else. I imagined the August steppe at night, I imagined that I heard his 
song and saw him with his head thrown back and his throat bare, I saw 
Jamila leaning against his shoulder. There was the trap and the two of 
them, there were the reins thrown over the front of the trap, the horses' 
backs joggling in the darkness, and beyond that, the steppe and the far- 
away stars. 

I was so engrossed in my work that I did not hear a thing and 
started when I heard someone's voice over me. 

"Are you deaf?" 

It was Jamila. I was embarrassed and blushed, but was not quick 
enough in hiding my drawing. 

"The traps are all loaded and we've been shooting for you this past 
hour! What are you doing here? What's this?" she asked, picking up the 
drawing. "Hm!" she shrugged angrily. 

I wished I were dead. She kept looking at the drawing for a long, 
long time and finally raised her sad, moist eyes to me. 

"Give it to me, kichine bala. I'll put it away as a remembrance," she 
said softly. Folding the sheet, she tucked it inside her blouse. 

We were already on the road, yet I could not come back to reality. 

It all seemed a dream. I could not believe that I had drawn something 
resembling that which I had seen. Yet, somewhere deep in my heart 
there grew a naive feeling of triumph, even pride, and dreams one more 
daring than the next, one more enticing than the next, made my head 
swim. I now wanted to do many more pictures. These would be 
paintings, not pencil drawings. I paid no attention to our fast pace. It 
was Daniyar who was racing his horses. Jamila did not fall behind. She 
kept looking about, at times she would smile in a touching, self- 
conscious way. I also smiled, for it meant she was no longer angry at 
us, and if she would ask him to, Daniyar would sing again that evening. 

That day we arrived at the station much earlier than usual, and our 
horses were in a lather. No sooner had we pulled up the traps than 
Daniyar began unloading. What had come over him? Why was he in 
such a rush? From time to time he would stop and follow the trains 
thundering by with a long, thoughtful gaze. Jamila followed his gaze in 
an effort to understand what he was thinking about. 

"Come here, this horse-shoe's loose. Help me pull it off," she called 
to him. 

When Daniyar had pried it off the hoof he was holding between his 



knees and had straightened up, Jamila looked into his eyes and asked 
softly: 

"What's the matter? Don't you understand? Or am I the only girl in 
the world?" 

Daniyar looked away and did not answer. 

"Do you think it's easy on me?" she sighed. 

Daniyar's eyebrows twitched, he gazed at her with love and sadness 
and replied so quietly I could not hear his words; then he quickly 
walked back to his trap, looking rather pleased. He stroked the horse- 
shoe as he walked. 

What consolation could he have found in Jamila's words? And 
could a person find consolation if one sighed heavily and said: "Do you 
think it's easy on me?" 

We were through with the unloading and were ready to leave, when 
a gaunt, wounded soldier in a creased greatcoat with a knapsack slung 
over his shoulder entered the yard of the receiving station. A few 
minutes before a train had pulled in. The soldier looked round and 
shouted: 

"Is there anyone here from Kurkureu village?" 

"I'm from Kurkureu!" I answered, wondering who the man could 
be. 

"Whose boy are you?" the soldier asked, walking towards me. 
Suddenly he saw Jamila, and a surprised and happy grin spread over 
his face. 

"Kerim? Is it you?" she cried. 

"Jamila, my dear!" he shouted and squeezed her hand tightly in his. 

He was her fellow- villager. 

"What luck! It certainly was lucky that I looked in here!" he said 
excitedly. "I just left Sadyk, we were in the hospital together, and with 
Allah to protect him, he'll be out in a month or two. When I was ready 
to leave I told him to write his wife a letter and promised to deliver it. 
Here it is, signed and sealed." Kerim handed her a triangular envelope. 

Jamila snatched it, blushed, then blanched and looked at Daniyar, 
cautiously from the corner of her eye. He stood beside the trap. As that 
day at the threshing-floor, he was a lonely figure standing beside the 
trap, his eyes full of wild despair as he looked straight at her. 

By then people began gathering from all sides; the soldier- 
discovered his friends and relations in the crowd, he was bombarded 
with questions. Before Jamila had a chance to thank him for the letter, 
Daniyar's trap clattered by, flew out of the yard and, raising a cloud of 



dust, went bumping along the rutted road. 

"He must be crazy!" the people shouted. 

The soldier had been led away by the crowd, while Jamila and I 
remained standing in the middle of the yard, looking at the fast- 
disappearing cloud of dust. 

"Come on, djene, " I said. 

"You go on, leave me alone!" she said bitterly. 

Thus, for the first time, each of us rode back alone. The stifling 
heat burned my parched lips. The cracked, scorched earth that had 
turned white from the heat of the day seemed to be cooling off and was 
becoming covered with salty grey flakes. The unsteady, formless sun 
shimmered in the salty white mist. There, above the dim horizon, 
orange-red storm clouds were gathering. Blasts of dry wind deposited 
white dust on the horses' muzzles, it waved their manes and passed on, 
rippling the clumps of wormwood on the hillocks. 

"It looks as though it is going to rain," I thought. 

I felt so lonely and anxious ! I whipped my horses on, for they kept 
slowing down to a walk. Skinny, long-legged bustards scampered past 
into the ravine. Withered burdock leaves were swept along the road; no 
burdocks grow on our lands, they had been blown over from the 
Kazakh side. The sun went down. There was not a soul in sight, 
nothing save the heat-exhausted steppe. 

It was dark when I reached the threshing-floor. The air was still and 
windless. I called to Daniyar. 

"He's gone to the river," the watchman answered. "It's so close, 
everyone's gone home. There's nothing to do at a threshing-floor if 
there's no wind!" 

I led the horses out to pasture and decided to go down to the river. I 
knew Daniyar' s favourite place near the Cliff. 

He was sitting there, hunched over, his head resting on his knees, 
and listening to the rushing water below. I wanted to walk up to him, 
put my arm around him and say something comforting. But what could 
I say? I stood off to a side and finally turned back. After that I lay for a 
long time on the straw, looking up at the cloud-darkened sky and 
wondering why life was so complicated and so difficult to understand. 

Jamila had not yet returned. What could have happened to her? I 
could not fall asleep, though I was dead tired. Lightning flashed in the 
cloud banks high over the mountains. 

When Daniyar came back to the threshing-floor I was still awake. 
He wandered about aimlessly, keeping a watchful eye on the road. 



Then he slumped down on the straw near by. I was certain he would 
leave, that he would never remain in the village! But where could he 
go? Alone and homeless, he had no one waiting for him. As I was 
dozing off I heard the slow clatter of an approaching trap. It was 
probably Jamila returning. 

I don't know how long I had been sleeping when I felt the straw 
rustle at my ear. Someone passed, and it seemed as if a wet wing 
brushed my shoulder. I opened my eyes. It was Jamila. She had come 
from the river, her dress was cool and damp. She stopped, looked 
round anxiously, and sat down beside Daniyar. 

"Daniyar, I've come, I've come to you myself," she said softly. 

All was silence. A bolt of lightning slipped earthward soundlessly. 

"Are you angry? Are you very angry?" 

Silence again. Then came the soft splash of a clump of loosened 
soil sliding into the water. 

"Is it my fault? And it's not your fault, either." 

Thunder rolled over the mountains. Jamila' s profile was clearly 
etched in a flash of lightning. She clung to Daniyar. Her shoulders 
heaved convulsively within his embrace. Then she stretched out on the 
straw beside him. 

A hot wind blew in from the steppe. It whirled the straw about, it 
crashed into a dilapidated tent at the edge of the threshing-floor and 
spun off like a crazy top down the road. Once again there was the dry 
crack of thunder and blue flashes pierced the clouds. It was both 
frightening and exciting— a storm was coming, the last storm of 
summer. 

"Did you think I would prefer him to you?" Jamila whispered 
passionately. "Never, never, never! He never loved me. He even sent 
me his regards as a postscript. I don't need him or his love that has 
come too late, and I don't care what people will say! My lonely darling, 
I'll never let you go! I've loved you for a long time. I loved you and 
waited for you even before I knew you and you came, as if you knew 
that I was waiting for you! " 

Crooked light-blue flashes of lightning plunged into the river near 
the cliff. Slanting icy raindrops pattered on the straw. 

"Jamila, my beloved Jamila!" Daniyar whispered, calling her by 
every loving Kazakh and Kirghiz name. "I, too, have loved you for a 
long time. I dreamed of you in the trenches and I knew that my love 
was in my native land. It was you, my Jamila! Turn round and let me 
look into your eyes!" 



The storm was upon us. 

The felt covering was wrenched off the tent and flapped like a 
wounded bird. The rain, whipped from below by the wind, came down 
in torrents and seemed to be kissing the earth. Peals of thunder rolled 
across the sky like an avalanche. Bright flashes of lightning illuminated 
the mountains, the wind howled and raged in the ravine. 

It was pouring. I lay hidden in the straw, feeling my own heart 
racing in my breast. I was happy. I felt as one who has come out into 
the sunshine after a long illness. Both the rain and the flashes of 
lightning reached me beneath the straw, but I was content and fell 
asleep with a smile, uncertain of whether the sound I heard was the 
subsiding rustling in the straw or Daniyar and Jamila whispering. 

The rainy season was close at hand. It would soon be autumn. 

There was the damp autumn smell of wormwood and wet straw in the 
air. What awaited us in the autumn? For some reason or other, I did not 
think about that then. 

That autumn, after a two-year break, I went back to school. After 
lessons were over I often came to the steep river bank and sat beside 
the now dead and deserted threshing-floor. Here I drew my first 
sketches. I recall that even then I realised my work was far from good. 

"These paints are no good! If only I had real paints!" I would say, 
though I had no idea of what "real" paints should be like. It was not 
until much later that I discovered the existence of real oil paints in little 
tubes. Be that as it may, my teachers were right it seemed: I needed 
tutoring. However, it was only a dream, for there was still no word 
from my brothers, and my mother would never have let me, her only 
son and the djigit and breadwinner of two families, go away to study. I 
dared not even bring up the subject. As if to make things harder for me 
the autumn that year was so beautiful, it cried to be painted. 

The icy Kurkureu became shallow, the tops of the stones at the 
rapids were covered with dark-green and orange moss. The tender, 
naked stems of the rose-willows appeared red in the early frosts, but 
the small poplars still retained their firm, short yellow leaves. 

The smoky, rain-drenched herdsmen's tents were black spots on the 
reddish after-grass of the flood-meadow; ribbons of acrid blue smoke 
curled over the smoke holes. The lean stallions whinnied loudly, the 
mares were drifting away and it would be difficult to keep them in 
herds till the spring. Flocks of cattle that had come down from the 
mountains wandered over the stubble. The dry, darkened steppe was 
criss-crossed by trampled paths. 



Soon the steppe wind began to blow, the sky became muddy and 
the cold rains, the forerunners of snow, began. One fairly pleasant day 
I went down to the river, attracted by a fiery bush of mountain ash 
growing on a sandbar. I sat down among the rose-willows, not far from 
the ford. Evening was falling. Suddenly I saw two people. They had 
probably crossed the ford. They were Daniyar and Jamila. I could not 
tear my eyes from their tense, yet determined faces. Daniyar had a 
knapsack slung over his shoulder; he walked quickly, and the flaps of 
his open greatcoat hit against the tops of his worn tarpaulin boots. 
Jamila had tied a white kerchief around her head and it had slid back. 
She wore her best print dress, the one she liked to show off in during 
Fair days, and a quilted corduroy jacket over it. In one hand she carried 
a small bundle and hung on to a strap of Daniyar's knapsack with the 
other. They were talking. 

They followed the path across the ravine through the thicket of 
needle grass. I watched them, not knowing what to do. Should I call to 
them? But I could not utter a sound. 

The last crimson rays slipped over the quick-moving clouds above 
the mountain range, and it began to get dark fast. Daniyar and Jamila 
never once turned back as they walked towards the railroad siding. 
Their heads bobbed in the thicket once or twice and then disappeared 
completely. 

" Jamila- a-a-a!" I shouted at the top of my voice. 

"A-a-a!" came the forlorn echo. 

"Jamila-a-a-a!" I shouted again and ran after them madly across the 
river. 

Sprays of icy drops hit my face. My clothes were drenched, but I 
ran on, not seeing the ground beneath my feet. Then I tripped and fell. I 
lay there without raising my head with the hot tears streaming down 
my face. The darkness seemed to weigh down upon my shoulders. I 
could hear the thin stems of needle grass wailing mournfully. 

"Jamila! Jamila!" I sobbed. 

I was saying good-bye to the two people closest and dearest to me. 
And as I lay there on the ground I suddenly realised that I loved Jamila. 
Yes, she was my first love, the love of my childhood. 

I lay there for a long time, my head buried in my wet arm. I was 
saying good-bye to more than Jamila and Daniyar— I was saying good- 
bye to my childhood. 

When I finally straggled home at dark, there was a great 
commotion in the yard; stirrups jangled, people were saddling their 



horses, and a drunken Osmon was prancing about on his steed, 
bellowing at the top of his voice: 

"We should've chased that stray mongrel from the village long ago! 
It's a disgrace to our whole kin! If I ever lay eyes on him. I'll kill him 
on the spot! And I don't care if I'm jailed for it— I won't permit every 
passing tramp to steal our women! Come on, djigits, he won't get away, 
we'll catch him at the station!" 

My blood froze: which road would they take? But once I was sure 
they had taken the highroad to the station and not the one to the siding, 
I slipped into the house and curled up under my father's sheepskin coat, 
covering my head so no one could see my tears. 

How much talk and gossip there was in the village after that! The 
women vied with each other in condemning Jamila. 

"She's a fool to have left such a family and trampled her 
happiness!" 

"I wonder what attracted her to this pauper?" 

"Don't worry, the little beauty will come to her senses, but it'll be 
too late then." 

"That's what I say! And what's wrong with Sadyk? Isn't he a good 
husband and provider? Why, he's the best djigit in the village!" 

"And what about her mother-in-law? It's not many who have a 
mother-in-law like that! You'd have to look far and wide for another 
such baibiche! The little fool has ruined her life for no good reason at 
all!" 

Perhaps I was the only one who did not condemn Jamila, my 
former djene. I, for one, knew that in his soul Daniyar was richer than 
any of us. No, I could not believe that Jamila would be unhappy with 
him. But I felt sorry for my mother. It seemed that when Jamila left, 
her former strength abandoned her also. She looked forlorn and 
haggard, and, as I now realise, she could not accept the fact that Fate 
could break all the old patterns so forcefully. If a great tree is uprooted 
by a storm it will never rise again. Before, my mother's pride would 
never have permitted her to ask anyone to thread a needle for her. But 
one day I came home from school and saw that her hands were 
trembling, that she could not see the needle's eye and was weeping. 

"Here, thread it for me," she asked and sighed heavily. .Jamila will 
come to no good end. Ah, what a housekeeper she would have made! 
But she's gone. She's renounced us. Why did she go? Was she so badly 
off here?" 

I wanted to embrace my mother and reassure her, to tell her what 



sort of a person Daniyar really was, but I did not dare to, for I would 
have insulted her terribly. 

But one day the innocent part I had played in the whole affair 
ceased to be a secret. 

Soon Sadyk returned. Naturally, he grieved, though when drunk he 
said to Osmon: 

"Good riddance, if she's gone! She'll die in the gutter someplace. 
There's enough women to go around. Even a golden-haired one isn't 
worth the puniest of fellows." 

"Sure!" Osmon answered. "I'm just sorry I didn't catch him, 'cause I 
would've killed him on the spot! And as for her. I'd have tied her hair 
to my horse's tail! They've probably gone south, to the cotton farms, or 
else to the Kazakhs. It's not the first time he's tramped about! But I just 
can't get it through my head— how could it have happened in the first 
place? Nobody knew a thing, and who would have ever suspected it? 
The bitch fixed it all up herself! If I could only lay my hands on her! " 

I felt like saying: "You can't forget how she slighted you, back in 
the field. What a mean and petty soul you have!" 

One day I was sitting at home, doing a picture for our school 
newspaper. My mother was fussing about the stove. Suddenly, Sadyk 
burst into the room. He was pale and his eyes were narrowed viciously 
as he ran up to me and shoved a piece of paper in my face. 

"Did you do this?" 

I was struck dumb. It was my first drawing. Daniyar and Jamila 
seemed alive as they looked at me from the sheet of paper. 

"Yes, I did." 

"Who's this?" he said, poking the page. 

"Daniyar." 

"Traitor!" Sadyk screamed. 

He tore the drawing to bits and stamped out, banging the door 
behind him. 

After a long and depressing silence my mother asked: 

"Did you know about it?" 

"Yes." 

She stood there, leaning against the stove, looking at me with 
dismay and reproach. And when I said: "I'll draw them again!" she 
shook her head sadly. 

I looked at the scraps of paper lying on the floor, a hurt I could not 
endure choking me. Let them think I was a traitor. Whom had I 
betrayed? My family? My kin? But I had not betrayed the truth of life, 



the truth of these two people! I could not say this, for even my own 
mother would not understand. 

Everything swam before my eyes, it seemed that the bits of paper 
were alive and moving about the floor. The memory of Daniyar and 
Jamila looking at me from the paper was so vivid that suddenly I 
seemed to hear Daniyar's song, the one he had sung that memorable 
August night. Recalling their departure from the village, an irresistible 
desire to take to the road rose within me. I would go as they had, firmly 
and courageously, to enter upon the difficult road to happiness. 

"I want to go away to study. Tell my father. I want to be an artist!" 

I said to my mother. 

I was certain that she would begin to reproach me and weep, 
recalling my brothers who had died in the war. But, to my surprise, she 
did not weep. She said softly and sadly: 

"If that's what you want to do. My fledglings have all grown strong 
and are flying off in their own directions. How are we to know how 
high you'll fly? Perhaps you're right. Go then. Maybe you'll change 
your mind when you get there. Drawing and smearing paint is no trade. 
You'll study and find out if it's so. And don't forget us." 

From that day the Small House separated from us. Soon after I left 
to study. 

That's all there is to the story. 

After I graduated from art school I was recommended for the 
Academy, and my diploma work was a painting I had dreamed of for 
many years. 

It is not difficult to guess that it was a painting of Daniyar and 
Jamila. They are seen walking along the autumn road across the steppe. 
Before them is the vast and bright horizon. 

Though my painting is not perfect— for skill does not come all at 
once— I treasure it, for it is my first truly creative experience. 

There are times when I am dissatisfied with my work. There are 
difficult moments when I lose faith in myself. At such times I am 
drawn to this painting that has become so dear to me, to Daniyar and 
Jamila. I gaze at them and each time speak to them. 

"Where are you now, what roads are you treading? We have many 
new roads in the steppe across Kazakhstan, up to the Altai and through 
Siberia! Many brave people are working there. Perhaps you, too, are 
there? My Jamila, you left with never a backward glance. Perhaps you 
are tired, perhaps you have lost faith in yourself? Lean against Daniyar, 
let him sing you his song of love, of the earth, of life. May the steppe 



reflect it and blossom in every hue and colour! May you recall that 
August night! Keep on, Jamila, never regret what you've done, for you 
have found your difficult happiness!" 

As I look at them I hear Daniyar's voice. He is calling to me to set 
out, and that means it is time for me to prepare for the journey. I will 
cross the steppe to my native village and will find new colours there. 

May my every brush-stroke resound with Daniyar's song! May my 
every brush-stroke echo the sound of Jamila's beating heart!