SAVITSKY, the Sixth Division commander, rose when he
saw me, and I marvelled at the beauty of his gigantic body. He
rose and — with the purple of his breeches, with his crimson
cap tilted to one side, with the decorations hammered into his
chest — cut the hut in half, as a banner cuts the sky. He smelt
of perfume and the overwhelmingly sweet coolness of soap. His
long legs looked like a pair of girls clad in shiny shoulder-length
jackboots.
He smiled at me, slapped his whip against the table and
reached for the order that the chief of staff had just dictated. It
was an order for Ivan Chesnokov to advance in the direction of
Chugunov-Dobryvodka with the regiment entrusted to him and,
upon coming into contact with the enemy, to destroy the same...
“...For said destruction,” wrote the division commander,
filling the whole sheet with his scrawl, “I hold Chesnokov
entirely responsible, under pain of capital punishment, and I’ll
shoot him down on the spot, which you, Comrade Chesnokov,
have no reason to doubt, as this isn’t our first month working
together at the front...”
The Sixth Division commander signed the order with a
flourish, tossed it to his orderlies and turned his face towards
me. His grey eyes were dancing with joy.
“Report!” he shouted, and cleaved the air with his whip.
Then he read the paper assigning me to the division staff.
“Make it an order!” said the division commander. “Make it an
order and issue him a soldier’s provisions — but he’ll take care
of his own privates. Can you read and write?”
“I can,” I said, envying the iron and flowers of his youth. “I’m
a graduate in law of Petersburg University...”
“You’re one of those pansies!” he shouted, laughing. “And
with glasses on your nose. What a little louse! ... They send you
without so much as checking with us — and you get cut to
pieces for glasses around here. Think you’ll get along, do you?”
“I’ll get along,” I said, and went off to the village with the
quartermaster to find lodging for the night. The quartermaster
carried my little trunk on his shoulders. The village street lay
before us. The dying sun, yellow and round as a pumpkin, was
breathing its last rosy breath into the sky.
We came up to a hut with painted carvings of garlands
around the windows. The quartermaster suddenly stopped and
said with an apologetic grin:
“We’ve got trouble with glasses around here, and you can’t
do a thing about it. A man of the highest distinction — he’s a
goner for sure. But you ruin a lady, the nicest little lady, and our
fighting boys treat you real kind...”
He hesitated a moment with my little trunk on his shoulders,
came right up to me, then jumped back in despair and ran into
the first courtyard. Cossacks were sitting on hay in there,
shaving one another.
“All right, men,” said the quartermaster, placing my little
trunk on the ground. “According to Comrade Savitsky’s orders,
you have to take this fellow into your billet, and no nonsense,
on account of his having suffered on the fields of learning...”
The quartermaster reddened and walked away without
looking back. I raised my hand to my cap and saluted the
Cossacks. A young lad with lank, flaxen hair and a handsome
Ryazan face walked up to my little trunk and flung it over the
gate. Then he turned his backside towards me and, with
unusual skill, began emitting shameful sounds.
“Artillery, zero calibre!” an older Cossack shouted and
laughed. “Rapid fire...”
The lad exhausted his simple art and walked off. Then,
crawling along the ground, I began gathering up the
manuscripts and tattered old clothes that had fallen out of my
little trunk. I gathered them up and carried them to the far end of
the yard. Pork was cooking in a kettle that stood on bricks near
the hut. It sent up a column of smoke, like one’s family home in
the village seen from a distance, mingling inside me a feeling of
hunger and unprecedented loneliness. I covered my battered
little trunk with hay, made a pillow out of it and lay down on the
ground to read Lenin’s speech at the Second Congress of the
Comintern in Pravda. The sun fell on me from behind jagged
hillocks, Cossacks stepped on my legs and the lad made fun of
me relentlessly; Lenin’s beloved lines travelled down a thorny
path and couldn’t reach me. So I put the paper aside and went
over to the landlady, who was spinning yarn on the porch.
“Hostess,” I said, “I gotta eat...”
The old woman lifted the flooded whites of her purblind eyes
towards me and lowered them again.
“Comrade,” she said, after a pause, “this business makes
me want to hang myself.”
“Mother of fucking Christ,” I muttered angrily, and pushed
the old woman in the chest with my fist. “I didn’t come here to
reason with you...”
Turning around, I saw someone else’s sabre lying close by.
A dour goose was wandering around the yard, calmly preening
its feathers. I caught up with him, bent him to the ground. The
goose’s head cracked under my boot, cracked and bled. The
white neck lay stretched out in the dung and the wings folded
over the dead bird.
“Mother of fucking Christ!” I said, digging the sabre into the
goose. “Roast it up for me, hostess.”
The old woman, her blindness and glasses glinting, picked
up the bird, wrapped it in her apron and carried it off to the
kitchen.
“Comrade,” she said, after a pause, “I want to hang myself,”
and shut the door behind her.
In the yard the Cossacks were already sitting around their
kettle. They were motionless, straight-backed as priests. They
hadn’t looked at the goose.
“Our kind of lad,” one of them said, winked, and scooped up
some cabbage soup with his spoon.
The Cossacks commenced their dinner with the restrained
elegance of peasants who hold one another in respect. I wiped
the sabre down with sand, went out of the gate and came back
in again, languishing. The moon hung over the yard like a
cheap earring.
“Little brother,” the eldest of the Cossacks, Surovkov,
suddenly said to me, “come and have a bite with us till your
goose is ready...”
He drew a spare spoon from his boot and handed it to me.
We supped up the home-made cabbage soup and ate the pork.
“What’re they writing in the newspaper?” asked the lad with
the flaxen hair, making room for me.
“In the newspaper Lenin writes...” I said, pulling out Pravda.
“Lenin writes we have a shortage in everything.”
And loudly, like a deaf man triumphant, I read Lenin’s
speech to the Cossacks.
Evening enveloped me in the bracing dampness of its
twilight sheets — evening laid its motherly palms on my blazing
forehead. I read and rejoiced, and caught, rejoicing, the
mysterious curve of Lenin’s straight line.
“Truth tickles every nostril,” Surovkov said when I’d finished.
“Question is, how do you pull it out of the pile? But Lenin hits it
straight away, like a hen pecking at a grain.”
That’s what Surovkov, platoon commander of the staff
squadron, said about Lenin, and then we went to sleep in the
hayloft. There were six of us, huddling together for warmth, our
legs tangled, under a roof full of holes that let in the stars. I had
dreams — dreamt of women — and only my heart, crimson with
murder, creaked and bled.