
The wise and wonderful life of Pan Apolek went straight to my head, like an exquisite wine. Among the huddling ruins of Novograd-Volynsk, a town crushed in haste, fate threw at my feet a gospel that had remained hidden from the world. There, surrounded by the guileless shine of halos, I took a solemn oath to follow the example of Pan Apolek. The sweetness of dreamy malice, the bitter contempt for the swine and dogs among men, the flame of silent and intoxicating revenge-I sacrificed them all to this oath.
An icon was hanging high on the wall in the home of the Novograd priest, who had fled. It bore the inscription: "The Death of John the Baptist." There was no doubt about it: in the portrayal of John I saw a man I had seen somewhere before.
I remember the gossamer stillness of a summer morning hung on the bright, straight walls. The sun had cast a ray straight on the foot of the icon. Sparkling dust swarmed in it. The tall figure of John came straight at me from the blue depths of the niche. A black cape hung tri- umphantly on that inexorable, repulsively thin body. Droplets of blood shone in the cape's round buckles. His head had been hacked diagonal- ly off the flayed neck. It lay on an earthen platter that was held by the large yellow fingers of a warrior. The face of the dead man seemed familiar. I was touched by a mysterious premonition. The hacked-off head on the earthen platter was modeled after Pan Romuald, the curate of the priest who had fled. Out of his snarling mouth curled the tiny body of a snake, its scales shining brightly. Its head, a tender pink, was bristling with life, and stood out powerfully against the deep back- ground of the cape.
I was amazed at the painter's artistry, his dark inventiveness. I was even more amazed the following day when I saw the red-cheeked Virgin Mary hanging above the matrimonial bed of Pani Eliza, the old priest's housekeeper. Both paintings bore the marks of the same brush. The meaty face of the Virgin Mary was a portrait of Pani Eliza. And this is where I found the key to the mystery of the Novograd icons. And the key led me to Pani Eliza's kitchen, where on fragrant evenings the shadows of old servile Poland gather, with the holy fool of a painter at their center. But was Pan Apolek a holy fool, peopling the local villages with angels, and elevating lame Janek, the Jewish convert, to sainthood?
Pan Apolek had come here thirty years ago on a summer day like any other with blind Gottfried. The two friends, Apolek and Gottfried, had gone to Shmerel's tavern on the Rovno high road, two versts from the edge of the town. In his right hand Apolek was hold- ing a box of paints, and with his left hand leading the blind concerti- na player. The melodious tread of their reinforced German boots echoed with calmness and hope. A canary-yellow scarf hung from Apolek's thin neck, and three chocolate-brown feathers swung on the blind man's Tyrolean hat.
The newcomers had placed the paints and the concertina on a win- dowsill in the tavern. The artist unwound his scarf, which was never- ending, like a fairground magician's ribbon. Then he went out into the yard, took off all his clothes, and poured freezing water over his thin, feeble, pink body. Shmerel's wife brought them raisin vodka and a bowl of meat cutlets stuffed with rice. Gottfried ate his fill, and then placed his concertina on his bony knees. He sighed, threw his head back, and flexed his thin fingers. The chords of the Heidelberg songs echoed against the walls of the Jewish tavern. With his scratchy voice Apolek accompanied the blind man. It was as if the organ had been brought from the Church of Saint Indegilda to Shmerel's tavern and the muses, with their quilted scarves and reinforced German boots, had seated themselves in a row upon this organ.
The two men sang till sunset, then they put the concertina and the paints into canvas sacks. Pan Apolek bowed deeply and gave Brayna, the taverner's wife, a sheet of paper.
"My dear Pani Brayna," he said. "Please accept from the hands of a wandering artist, upon whom the Christian name of Apollinarius has been bestowed, this portrait as a sign of our most humble gratitude for your sumptuous hospitality. If the Lord Jesus Christ sees fit to length- en my days and give strength to my art, I will come back and add color to this portrait. There shall be pearls in your hair and a necklace of emeralds upon your breast."
Drawn on a small sheet of paper with a red pencil, a pencil red and soft like clay, was Pani Brayna's laughing face, surrounded by a mass of copper curls.
"My money!" Shmerel shouted when he saw his wife's portrait. He grabbed a stick and started running after the two men. But as he ran, Shmerel remembered Apolek's pink body with water splashing all over it, the sun in his little courtyard, and the soft sound of the concertina. The taverner's soul drooped, and, putting the stick down, he went back
home.
The following morning, Apolek showed the priest of Novograd his diploma from the Munich Academy, and laid out before him twelve paintings with biblical motifs. They had been painted with oil on boards of thin cypress wood. On his table the Pater saw the burning purple of cloaks, the emerald sparkle of fields, and blossoming blankets of flowers flung over the plains of Palestine.
Pan Apolek's saints, a multitude of simple, jubilating elders with beards and red faces, were encircled by streams of silk and potent evening skies.
gray
That same day, Pan Apolek was commissioned to do paintings for the new church. And over Benedictine wine, the Pater said to the artist: "Sancta Maria! My dear Pan Apollinarius, from what wondrous realms has your joyous grace descended upon us?"
Apolek worked with great zeal, and within a month the new church was filled with the bleating of herds, the dusty gold of setting suns, and straw-colored cow udders. Buffaloes with worn hides strug- gled under their yokes, dogs with pink muzzles trotted in front of the large flocks of sheep, and plump infants rocked in cradles that hung from the trunks of tall palm trees. The tattered brown habits of Franciscan monks crowded around a cradle. The group of wise men stood out with their shining bald heads and their wrinkles red like wounds. The small, wrinkled old face of Pope Leo XIII twinkled with its fox-like smile from the group of wise men, and even the priest of Novograd was there, running the fingers of one hand through the carved beads of a Chinese rosary while with his other, free hand, he blessed the infant Jesus.
For five months Apolek inched along the walls, the cupola, and the choir stalls, fastened to the wooden scaffolding.
"You have a predilection for familiar faces, my dear Pan Apolek,” the priest once said, recognizing himself among the wise men and Pan Romuald in the severed head of John the Baptist. The old Pater smiled, and sent a tumbler of cognac up to the artist working beneath the cupola.
Apolek finished the Last Supper and the Stoning of Mary Magdalene. Then one Sunday he unveiled the walls. The distinguished citizens the priest had invited recognized Janek the lame convert in the Apostle Paul, and in Mary Magdalene Elka, a Jewish girl of unknown parentage and mother of many of the urchins roaming the streets. The distinguished citizens demanded that the blasphemous images be painted over. The priest showered threats over the blasphemer, but Apolek refused to paint over the walls.
And so an unprecedented war broke out, with the powerful body of the Catholic Church on one side, and the unconcerned icon painter on the other. The war lasted for three decades. The situation almost turned the gentle idler into the founder of a new heresy; in which case he would have been the most whimsical and ludicrous fighter among the many in the slippery and stormy history of the Church of Rome, a fighter roaming the earth in blessed tipsiness with two white mice under his shirt and with a collection of the finest little brushes in his pocket.
"Fifteen zloty for the Virgin Mary, twenty-five zloty for the Holy Family, and fifty zloty for the Last Supper portraying all the client's family. The client's enemy can be portrayed as Judas Iscariot, for which an extra ten zloty will be added to the bill," Pan Apolek informed the peasants after he had been thrown out of the Novograd church.
There was no shortage of commissions. And when a year later the archbishop of Zhitomir sent a delegation in response to the frenzied epistles of the Novograd priest, they found the monstrous family por- traits, sacrilegious, naive, and flamboyant, in the most impoverished, foul-smelling hovels. Josephs with gray hair neatly parted in the mid- dle, pomaded Jesuses, many-childed village Marys with parted knees. The pictures hung in the icon corners, wreathed with garlands of paper flowers.
"
"He has bestowed sainthood upon you people during your life- time!" the bishop of Dubno and Novokonstantinov shouted at the crowd that had come to defend Apolek. "He has endowed you with the ineffable attributes of the saints, you, thrice fallen into the sin of dis- obedience, furtive moonshiners, ruthless moneylenders, makers of counterfeit weights, and sellers of your daughters' innocence!"
"Your holiness!" lame-footed Witold, the town's cemetery watch- man and procurer of stolen goods, then said to the bishop. "Where does our all-forgiving Lord God see truth, and who will explain it to these ignorant villagers? Is there not more truth in the paintings of Pan Apolek, who raises our pride, than in your words that are filled with abuse and tyrannical anger?"
The shouts of the crowd sent the bishop running. The agitation in the villages threatened the safety of the clerics. The painter who had taken Apolek's place could not work up the courage to paint over Elka and lame Janek. They can still be seen today above a side altar of the Novograd church: Janek, as Saint Paul, a timorous cripple with the shaggy black beard of a village apostate, and Elka as the whore from Magdala, decrepit and crazed, with dancing body and fallen cheeks.
The battle with the priest lasted three decades. Then the Cossack flood chased the old monk out of his aromatic stone nest, and Apolek- O fickle fortune!-settled into Pani Eliza's kitchen. And here I am, a passing guest, imbibing the wine of his conversation in the evenings.
What do we converse about? About the romantic days of the Polish nobility, the fanatical frenzy of women, the art of Luca della Robbia,* and the family of the Bethlehem carpenter.
"There is something I have to tell you, Mr. Clerk," Apolek tells me secretively before supper.
"Yes," I answer. "Go ahead, Apolek, I'm listening.'
But Pan Robacki, the lay brother of the church-stern, gray, bony, and with large ears-is sitting too close. He unfolds a faded screen of silence and animosity before us.
"I have to tell you, Pan," Apolek whispers, taking me aside, “that Jesus Christ, the son of Mary, was married to Deborah, a Jerusalem girl of low birth-"
"O, ten czlowiek!"* Pan Robacki shouts in despair. "This man not dies in his bed! This man the peoples will be killing!"
"After supper," Apolek murmurs in a gloomy voice. "After supper, if that will suit you, Mr. Clerk."
It suits me. Inflamed by the beginning of Apolek's story, I pace up and down the kitchen waiting for the appointed time. And outside the window night stands like a black column. Outside the window the bristling, dark garden has fallen still. The road to the church flows beneath the moon in a sparkling, milky stream. The earth is covered with a dismal sheen, a necklace of shining berries is draped over the bushes. The aroma of lilacs is clean and strong as alcohol. The seething oily breath of the stove drinks in this fresh poison, killing the stuffy resinous heat of the spruce wood lying about the kitchen floor.
Apolek is wearing a pink bow tie and threadbare pink trousers, and is puttering about in his corner like a friendly graceful animal. His table is smeared with glue and paint. He is working in quick small move- ments. A hushed, melodic drumming comes drifting from his corner: it is old Gottfried tapping with his trembling fingers. The blind man is sitting rigidly in the greasy yellow lamplight. His bald head is drooping as he listens to the incessant music of his blindness and the muttering of Apolek, his eternal friend.
...And what the priests and the Evangelist Mark and the Evangelist Matthew are telling you, Pan Clerk, is not truth. But truth can be revealed to you, Pan, for I am prepared for fifty marks to paint your portrait in the form of Saint Francis on a background of green and sky. He was a very simple saint, Pan Francis was. And if you have a bride in Russia, Pan Clerk, women love Saint Francis, although not all women, Pan."
And from his spruce-wood-scented corner he began telling me the tale of the marriage of Jesus to Deborah. According to Apolek, Deborah already had a bridegroom, a young Israelite who traded in ivory. But Deborah's wedding night ended in bewilderment and tears. The woman was grabbed by fear when she saw her husband approach her bed. Hiccups bulged in her throat and she vomited all the food she had eaten at the wedding table. Shame fell upon Deborah, on her father, her mother, and on all her kin. The bridegroom abandoned her with words of ridicule, and called all the guests together. And Jesus, filled with pity at seeing the anguish of the woman who was thirsting for her husband but also fearing him, donned the robes of the newlywed man and unit- ed himself with Deborah as she lay in her vomit. Afterward she went out to the wedding guests, loudly exulting like a woman proud of her fall. And only Jesus stood to the side. His body was drenched with mortal sweat, for the bee of sorrow had stung his heart. He left the banquet hall unnoticed, and went into the desert east of Judea, where John the Baptist awaited him. And Deborah gave birth to her first son...."
"So where is that son?" I yelled.
"The priests have hidden him," Apolek said with gravity, raising his thin, cold finger to his drunkard's nose.
"Pan Artist!" Robacki suddenly shouted, stepping out of the shad- ows, his gray ears quaking. "What you saying? But this is outrage!" “Tak, tak,” Apolek said, cringing and grabbing hold of Gottfried. "Tak, tak, panie."
Apolek pulled the blind man toward the door, but stopped by the doorpost and beckoned me with his finger.
"Saint Francis with a bird on your sleeve," he whispered, winking at me. "A dove or a goldfinch, you can choose, Pan Clerk!"
And he disappeared with his blind eternal friend.
"Oh, what foolishness!" Robacki, the church lay brother, said. "This man not dies in his bed!"
Pan Robacki opened his mouth wide and yawned like a cat. I wished him a good night, and went home, to my plundered Jews, to sleep.
The vagrant moon trailed through the town and I tagged along, nurturing within me unfulfillable dreams and dissonant songs.