Yesterday I took a report over to the military commissar who had
been billeted to the house of a Catholic priest who had fled. In the kitchen I was met by Pani* Eliza, the Jesuit's housekeeper. She gave me a cup of amber tea and some sponge cake. Her sponge cakes had the aroma of crucifixion. Within them was the sap of slyness and the fra- grant frenzy of the Vatican.
In the church next to the house the bells were howling, tolled by the crazed bell ringer. It was an evening filled with the stars of July. Pani Eliza, shaking her attentive gray hair, kept on heaping cookies on my plate, and I delighted in the Jesuitical fare.
The old Polish woman addressed me as "Pan," gray old men with ossified ears stood to attention near the door, and somewhere in the serpentine darkness slithered a monk's soutane. The Pater had fled, but he had left behind his curate, Pan Romuald.
Romuald was a eunuch with a nasal voice and the body of a giant, who addressed us as "Comrade." He ran his yellow finger along the map, circling the areas where the Poles had been defeated. He count- ed the wounds of his fatherland with rasping ecstasy. May gentle oblivion engulf the memory of Romuald, who betrayed us without pity and was then shot without so much as a second thought. But that evening his tight soutane rustled at all the portieres and swept through all the corridors in a frenzy, as he smiled at everyone who wanted a drink of vodka. That evening the monk's shadow crept behind me﻿ wherever I went. Pan Romuald could have become a bishop if he had not been a spy.
I drank rum with him. The breath of an alien way of life flickered beneath the ruins of the priest's house, and Pan Romuald's ingratiating seduction debilitated me. O crucifixes, tiny as the talismans of a cour- tesan! O parchment of the Papal Bull and satin of women's love letters moldering in blue silken waistcoats!
I can see you now, you deceptive monk with your purple habit, your puffy, swollen hands, and your soul, tender and merciless like a cat's! I can see the wounds of your God, oozing with the seed, the fragrant poi- son that intoxicates young maidens.
We drank rum, waiting for the military commissar, but he still had- n't come back from headquarters. Romuald had collapsed in a corner and fallen asleep. He slept and quivered, while beyond the window an alley seeped into the garden beneath the black passion of the sky. Thirsting roses swayed in the darkness. Green lightning bolts blazed over the cupolas. A naked corpse lay on the embankment. And the rays of the moon streamed through the dead legs that are pointing upward.
So this is Poland, this is the arrogant grief of the Rzeczpospolita Polska!* A violent intruder, I unroll a louse-ridden straw mattress in this church abandoned by its clergymen, lay under my head a folio in + which a Hosanna has been printed for Jozef Pilsudski, the illustrious leader of the Polish nobility.
Hordes of beggars are converging on your ancient towns, O Poland! The song of all the enslaved is thundering above them, and woe unto you, Rzeczpospolita Polska, and woe unto you, Prince Radziwill, and you Prince Sapieha,** who have risen for an hour.
My military commissar has still not returned. I go look for him at the headquarters, the garden, the church. The doors of the church are wide open, I enter, and suddenly come face-to-face with two silver skulls flashing up from the lid of a shattered coffin. Aghast, I stumble﻿ back and fall down into the cellar. The oak staircase leads up to the altar from here, and I see a large number of lights flitting high up, right under the cupola. I see the military commissar, the commander of the special unit, and Cossacks carrying candles. They hear my weak cry and come down to haul me out from the basement.
The skulls turn out to have been carved into the church catafalque and no longer frighten me. I join the others on their search of the premises, because it turned out that that was what they were doing in the church, conducting a search, as a large pile of military uniforms had been found in the priest's apartment.'

With wax dripping from our hands, the embroidered gold horse heads on our cuffs glittering, we whisper to one another as we circle with clinking spurs through the echoing building. Virgin Marys, cov- ered with precious stones, watch us with their rosy, mouselike eyes, the flames flicker in our fingers, and rectangular shadows twist over the statues of Saint Peter, Saint Francis, Saint Vincent, and over their crim- son cheeks and curly, carmine-painted beards.
We continue circling and searching. We run our fingers over ivory buttons and suddenly icons split open, revealing vaults and caverns blossoming with mold. This church is ancient and filled with secrets. Its lustrous walls hide clandestine passages, niches, and noiseless trap- doors.
You foolish priest, hanging the brassieres of your female parish- ioners on the nails of the Savior's cross! Behind the holy gates we found a suitcase of gold coins, a morocco-leather sackful of banknotes, and Parisian jewelers' cases filled with emerald rings.
We went and counted the money in the military commissar's room. Columns of gold, carpets of paper money, wind gusts blowing on our candle flames, the raven madness in the eyes of Pani Eliza, the thun- dering laughter of Romuald, and the endless roar of the bells tolled by Pan Robacki, the crazed bell ringer.
"I have to get away from here," I said to myself, "away from these winking Madonnas conned by soldiers."