… So as long as she’s here, everything’s still all right: I can go over and
look at her any time; but tomorrow they’ll be taking her away and how
on earth will I manage on my own? At the moment she’s in the room on
a table, two card-tables put together, but tomorrow the coffin arrives,
white, white gros de Naples* still, where was I … I keep pacing about
trying to make sense of all this. I’ve been trying to make sense of it for
six hours now and I still can’t get my thoughts into focus. The thing is, I
keep on pacing and pacing about … This is how it happened. I’ll just tell
it in order (order!). Ladies and gentlemen, I’m a long way from being a
literary man, as you can well see, but be that as it may, I will tell it as
far as I understand it. In fact, that’s the horrible thing about it for me—I
understand it all!
If you want to know, I mean if I start from the very beginning, she
used to come to me to pawn articles, as simple as that, to finance an
advertisement in The Voice—something on the lines of governess, willing
to travel, give lessons at people’s homes, and so on and so forth. That
was at the very beginning and naturally I didn’t differentiate between
her and the others; she used to come along like the rest, well, you know.
Then I did begin to take notice of her. She was a fair-haired, delicate
creature, medium tall; she was always ill at ease with me, awkward
somehow (I fancy she was like that with everybody she didn’t know, and
to her of course I was no different from anyone else, as a man I mean,
not a pawnbroker). As soon as she got her money, she would turn about
and leave immediately. And not a word spoken. The others used to
argue, insist, haggle for more; she never did, just took what was offered
… I fancy I’m getting things out of order … Yes; the first thing that
struck me was the type of thing she used to bring in: little silver-gilt
earrings, a trashy little medallion—not worth two kopeks any of it. She
was well aware they were only worth coppers, but I could tell by her
face that to her they were precious—in fact they were all that remained
to her of her father and mother, as I afterwards learned. Only once did I
presume to smile at these trinkets of hers. I mean, I never let myself do
that, you see, I maintain a gentlemanly front with the public: few words,
polite and formal. ‘Discipline, discipline, always discipline.’* But, all of a
sudden, she had ventured to bring the remnants (I mean literally) of an
old jacket lined with rabbit fur, I just couldn’t help coming out with
some witticism. Ye gods, did she flare up! She had big blue wistful eyes,
but how they flashed! She uttered no word, however, just gathered up
the ‘remnants’ and went off. It was at that point that I took special notice
of her for the first time and started thinking about her in that way, I
mean in a special sort of way. Yes: I also remember what struck me, my
chief impression if you like, what summed it all up: it was that she was
terribly young, so young you’d have taken her for 14. Yet in fact she was
actually three months off 16. Still, that’s not what I wanted to say, that
wasn’t what I meant by summing her up. She turned up again the
following day. I found out later that she’d been to Dobronravov and
Mozer* with that jacket of hers, but they take nothing but gold and
wouldn’t discuss the matter. I did once accept a precious stone from her
(rubbishy, you know) and when I came to think about it afterwards, I
was surprised: I don’t accept anything apart from gold and silver myself,
but I’d let her pawn a stone. That was the second thought I had about
her at the time, I remember that.
On this occasion, coming back from Mozer I mean, she brought an
amber cigar-holder—not a bad little article, a collector’s item, but
valueless as far as we were concerned, because we only deal in gold.
Since this was after the previous day’s revolt I received her formally.
With me that takes the form of coldness. However, as I gave her two
roubles, I couldn’t help adding with a hint of irritation: ‘You know, I’m
only doing this because it’s you. Mozer wouldn’t accept a thing like this.’
I made a point of stressing the words ‘it’s you’, giving them a special
meaning. I was being spiteful. She flared up again on hearing ‘it’s you’,
but held her peace and took the money without flinging it back—that’s
what poverty does to you! But did she flare up! I knew I’d touched a
nerve. After she had gone, I asked myself suddenly: was it really worth
two roubles to triumph over her? Heh, heh, heh! I remember asking
myself twice over: ‘Was it worth it? Was it worth it?’ And laughed as I
answered my own question in the affirmative. I enjoyed myself no end at
the time. There was nothing ill-natured about it, though: I had a
purpose, something in mind; I meant to test her because certain notions
touching her had occurred to me. That was the third special kind of
thought I had about her.
… So that’s how it all started. Naturally, I immediately began finding
out everything I could about her indirectly, and awaited her arrival with
a special sense of anticipation. I certainly had a premonition that she
would be coming back soon. When she did arrive, I launched into a
polite conversation with extreme courtesy. I am after all a man of some
breeding and I do have manners. Ahem. I divined at once that she was a
gentle and kindly creature. Gentle and kindly creatures don’t put up
much resistance and, though they may not reveal much of themselves,
they have no idea of how to evade a conversation: they are sparing in
their replies but they do reply, and the longer it goes on, the more you
learn, but you have to keep at it, if that’s what you’re after. Naturally
she didn’t explain anything at the time. That bit about The Voice and the
rest of it I found out later on. She was advertising with the last of her
resources then, proudly at first: ‘Governess, willing to travel, conditions
of employment should be sent in sealed envelope’, then later: ‘Willing to
take on anything, teaching, lady’s companion, housekeeping, nursing,
able to sew’ and so on and so forth, the usual kind of thing! Naturally,
all this was added to the advertisement in gradual stages and towards
the end, when despair was setting in, there came ‘no salary required,
board only’. No, she couldn’t find a post! I made up my mind to test her
one last time: I suddenly picked up that day’s Voice and showed her an
advertisement: ‘Young lady, orphan, seeks a post as governess,
preferably with a middle-aged widower. Can assist with housekeeping.’
‘There, you see, that was in the paper this morning and she probably
found a job by evening. Now that’s the way to advertise!’
She flared up again, again her eyes blazed as she turned and went out.
I was much taken with that. Actually, by that time I was supremely
confident about the whole business and had no qualms at all: nobody
would take those cigar-holders of hers. And anyway she’d run out of
those too. So it turned out, two days later in she comes, all pale and full
of nerves; I guessed that something had happened at home, and so it
had. I’ll explain presently what that was, but I would just like to recall
how I suddenly put on a bit of style and rose in her estimation. This was
how I suddenly put on a bit of style and rose in her estimation. This was
the notion that suddenly came to me. The point was she had brought me
this icon (nerved herself to do it!)… Ah, listen, just listen! This was
when it really began, I’ve been getting it all mixed up … The thing is
now I want to recall everything, every tiny point, every detail. I keep
wanting to get my thoughts into focus and—I just can’t, and then those
details, details …
An icon of the Madonna. Madonna and child, domestic, a family,
ancient, silver-gilt mounting, worth say six roubles. I could see she
treasured it; she was pawning the whole thing, mounting and all. I told
her it would be better to detach the mounting and take the icon away, it
was an icon after all.
‘Surely you’re not forbidden to accept it?’
‘No, not forbidden, it’s just that perhaps you …’
‘All right, detach the mounting.’
‘I’ll tell you what, I won’t take it off, I’ll put it over there in the icon
case’, I said, after a moment’s thought, ‘along with the other icons under
the lamp’ (the lamp had been kept permanently lit since I opened the
office), ‘and you can have ten roubles and there’s all about it.’
‘I don’t need ten, just give me five. I assure you I’ll redeem it.’
‘You don’t want ten? The icon’s worth that’, I added, noting that her
eyes had flashed again. She said nothing. I took out five roubles for her.
‘No need to look down on people, I’ve been in similar straits myself,
even worse in fact, yes indeed, and if you see me now in this occupation
… well, it’s after coming through a good deal…’
‘You’re getting your own back against society, is that it?’ she broke in.
Still, there was a deal of innocence in the tart mockery (generalized I
Still, there was a deal of innocence in the tart mockery (generalized I
mean, because at that time she certainly did not differentiate between
me and anyone else, so the effect was inoffensive). ‘Aha’, thought I. ‘So
that’s the kind of girl you are, your true character emerges, you’re one of
the “new tendency”.’
‘You see’, I put in at once, half-jocular, half-enigmatic, ‘I … I am part
of that part of the whole which would work evil but engenders good
instead …’
She shot a swift glance at me. Her keen curiosity had much that was
childlike.
‘Just a moment … What was that idea? Where does it come from? I’ve
heard it somewhere …’
‘Don’t rack your brains, it’s Mephistopheles introducing himself to
Faust. You’ve read Faust?’
‘Not … properly.’
‘Not read it at all you mean. You should. However, I can see
something of a sneer on your lips again. Please don’t suppose I am so
deficient in taste as to glorify my role as pawnbroker by introducing
myself as Mephistopheles. Once a pawnbroker, always a pawnbroker.
I’m aware of that, miss.’
‘You’re rather a strange man … I wasn’t intending to say anything of
the sort…’
What she implied was: I didn’t expect you to be an educated man. She
didn’t say it, but I knew that was what she was thinking; I’d made no
end of an impression.
‘You see’, I remarked, ‘a man can do good whatever career he follows.
I exclude myself of course, one might say I do nothing of the kind, but…’
‘Of course one can do good in any job’, she said, with a swift and
penetrating glance at me. ‘Any job at all’, she added abruptly. Ah, I
remember, I remember all those moments! I would also add, that when
young people, those sweet young things, try to come out with something
clever and perceptive, their faces show only too frankly and naively that
‘now I’m telling you something clever and perceptive’, not out of vanity
like the rest of us; no, you can see that she places enormous value on it
all and believes and respects it, thinking that you hold it in the same
high regard. Ah, sincerity! That’s how they lay us low. And how
delightful it was in her!
I remember it all, I’ve forgotten nothing! After she had gone out, I
immediately came to a decision. That very day I went about my final
enquiries and found out what else there was to know about her, all the
latest ins and outs; I had elicited all the details of her earlier life from
Lukeriya, who worked for them at the time and whom I had bribed some
days earlier. Those details had been so horrifying that I simply don’t
understand how she could laugh as she had done just now, or become
curious about Mephistopheles’ words when she herself was in such a
dreadful situation. But—there’s youth for you! That was precisely what I
thought about her then with pride and gladness, because there was highmindedness, as if to say: even on the brink of disaster, Goethe’s words
shine out. Young people always have at least a dash of this highmindedness, even if it’s wrong-headed. But it’s really her I’m talking
about, just her. The point was, I was already beginning to look on her as
mine and had no doubts about my power. You know, that’s a really
sensual feeling, when you have no doubts at all.
But what’s the matter with me? If I go on like this, when am I going
to get it all in focus? Quick about it—this is all beside the point, God!
to get it all in focus? Quick about it—this is all beside the point, God!
II. A Proposal of Marriage
THE ‘details’ I had learned about her I can recount in a very few words:
her father and mother had died a considerable time before, three years
previously, and she had been left in the hands of some disorganized
aunts of hers. And that’s putting it mildly. One aunt was a widow, with a
numerous family, six children in descending order of age. The other was
an old maid, awful woman. They were both awful. The father had been
an official but only in the clerical grade, and his title was nonhereditary. In a word: the situation was made for me. I had appeared as
it were from some higher world: I was a retired staff captain from a
crack regiment, a hereditary nobleman, of independent means, so forth.
As for the pawnbroking business, the aunts could only have a respectful
attitude towards that. She had been a slave to those aunties for three
years, but had nevertheless passed some sort of exam, contrived to pass
it, found leisure indeed to pass it despite her pitiless daily round of toil,
and that certainly was a good indication of aspirations towards the lofty
and noble on her part. After all, why did I intend to marry her? Still,
never mind me, that can wait… It’s irrelevant anyway!
She tutored the aunties’ children, made underclothes, and ended up
not only washing clothes but scrubbing floors too, with that chest of
hers. They even used to beat her, just like that, and begrudged her a
crust of bread. In the end they were considering selling her. Ugh! I’ll
omit the sordid details. Later she told me all about it. The fat shopkeeper
next door, owner of two grocery stores besides, had been keeping an eye
on all this for a year or more. He had buried two wives already and was
on the look-out for a third, so he was running the rule over her: ‘She’s a
quiet sort of girl’, thought he, ‘grown up in poverty; I’ll marry her for the
sake of the children.’ And he did indeed have children. He started
making advances, and opened negotiations with the aunts. He was a
man of 50, and she was horrified. That was when she started frequenting
my premises to finance the advertisements in the The Voice. At length,
she asked her aunts to allow her just the briefest time to think the matter
over. They gave her precisely that and no more; they kept on at her: ‘We
don’t know where the next meal is coming from ourselves, and that’s
without an extra mouth to feed.’ I was well aware that all this was going
on and that same day, after the morning’s incident, I made my decision.
That evening, the grocer turned up with a fifty-kopek pound of sweets
from the shop; she was sitting with him when I summoned Lukeriya
from the kitchen and told her to whisper that I was at the front gate and
had something very urgent to tell her. I was feeling pleased with myself.
In fact I had been in a frightfully good mood all that day.
There and then, by the gate, with Lukeriya present, I explained to her,
astonished as she was by my summons, that I would regard it as my
good fortune and an honour … Secondly, she wasn’t to be too surprised
at my manner and the fact that we were at the front gate: I was a blunt
individual, I said, and was well aware of how matters stood. Blunt was
no more than the truth. Well, never mind about that. I spoke with due
decorum, demonstrating thereby that I was well bred, but also with a
touch of originality, which was what really mattered. Well, is that so
dreadful a confession? I intend to sit in judgement on myself and am so
doing. I am bound to speak pro and contra, and am so doing. Afterwards
I recalled the scene with positive pleasure, though that was silly too: I
declared bluntly, without a trace of embarrassment, that firstly I had no
great talent, wasn’t especially clever, perhaps not especially goodnatured either, rather a cheap sort of egoist (I remember that expression,
I’d thought it up on the way there and was much taken with it), and that
it was eminently possible that I possessed a good many defects in other
areas too. All this was delivered with a peculiar kind of pride—
everybody knows the technique. Of course, after nobly declaring my
shortcomings, I had sufficient good taste not to launch into a catalogue
of my virtues, as it might be: ‘But, on the other hand, I am this, that or
the other.’ I could see that as yet she was horribly nervous, but I didn’t
cushion the effect of this, far from it; observing her alarm, I deliberately
intensified it. I said plainly that she would have enough to eat, but as for
fine clothes, theatres, dancing—there would be none of that, except
possibly later on when I had achieved my aim. I was getting quite
carried away with this harsh tone I had adopted. I added, as casually as I
could, that if I had undertaken this business, running a pawnbroker’s
office I mean, it was because I had only one end in view; there was, so to
speak, a certain circumstance … But after all, I did have the right to
speak in this way: I really did have such an end in view, and the
circumstance did exist. Just a moment, ladies and gentlemen, all my life
I have been the first to detest this pawnbroking business, but in actual
fact, though it may be absurd to be talking to myself in enigmatic
phrases, I was indeed ‘taking it out on society’, I was, I really was! So
that her gibe of that morning about me avenging myself was unjustified.
You see, what I mean is, if I had come straight out with the words: ‘Yes,
I’m taking it out on society’, she would have burst out laughing, the way
she had done that morning, and the whole thing would have been an
absurdity. Well then, an oblique hint and an enigmatic phrase were
enough, it seemed, to beguile her imagination. Besides, by now I was
absolutely certain of myself: at all events, I knew, of course, that the fat
shopkeeper was more repulsive to her than I was, and that as I stood by
the gate, I appeared in the guise of liberator. I was fully aware of that.
Ah yes, man understands his contemptible actions all too well! But were
they contemptible, though? How can a man be judged in a case like this?
Didn’t I love her even then?
Wait: naturally, I said not so much as a word to her about being her
benefactor; on the contrary, very much the contrary: ‘It is I who am in
receipt of any favour, not you.’ I went so far as to utter it aloud, I
couldn’t help it, and no doubt it sounded rather silly, as I noticed the
fleeting ghost of a smile on her face. But overall I emerged the victor.
Wait a moment: if I have to bring all this filth up, I’ll include my final
swinish trick: I was standing and it crossed my mind: you’re tall, slim,
well bred—and really, without boasting, not bad looking. That was the
notion I was toying with. Naturally, she said ‘yes’ then and there. But …
but I have to add that as she stood there by the gate, she thought it over
for a long time before saying ‘yes’. She pondered and pondered so long I
was on the point of asking: ‘Well, what then?’ and couldn’t help adding a
bit of a flourish: ‘Well, what’s it to be then, miss?’
‘Wait, I’m thinking.’
And what a grave little face she had; I should have read it even then!
But my reaction was to take offence: ‘Surely, I thought, she wasn’t taking
time to choose between a businessman and myself? Ah, how little I
understood at the time! I understood precisely nothing at the time! I
haven’t realized it until today. I remember Lukeriya running out after me
as I was leaving, and stopping me on the road as she gasped: ‘God will
reward you, sir, for taking our dear young lady, but don’t tell her that,
she’s a proud one.’
Proud, eh? Well, I thought, I’m fond of proud little girls. The proud
ones are especially nice when … well, when you’re confident of your
power over them, eh? Ah, you sordid, blundering individual! Oh, how
pleased I was with myself! You know, as she stood there by the gate
considering whether to say ‘yes’, I was astonished, you know, that she
might be entertaining some such notion as: ‘If I’m to be unhappy in any
event, would it not be better to choose the worst one straight away, the
fat shopkeeper, and let him beat me to death when he’s drunk, sooner
the better?’ Eh? What say you, could she have been thinking that?
Even now I don’t understand, even now it’s all a mystery to me. I said
just now that she might have been thinking that way; to choose the
worse of two calamities, the shopkeeper that is. But who was the worse
for her then—the grocer or me? The tradesman or the Goethe-quoting
pawnbroker? Now there’s a question! What question? You can’t make
sense of that either: the answer is lying on that table and you say
‘question’! Well, never mind about me! I’m totally irrelevant…
Incidentally, what is it to me now whether I’m irrelevant or not? That
really is completely beyond me. Better turn in. I’ve got a headache …
III. The Noblest of Men, but I Don’t Believe that Myself
I COULDN’T get to sleep. How could I with that pulse pounding away
inside my head? I keep wanting to assimilate all that filth. Ah, the filth!
The filth I extricated her from back then! I mean she must have realized
it, appreciated what I was doing! There were various notions that
appealed to me at the time, that I was 41, for instance, while she was
barely 16. The thought entranced me, that sense of disparity, most
delightful that, most delightful.
For instance, I wanted a wedding à l’anglaise, just the two of us in
other words, with only the two witnesses, one of them Lukeriya, then off
on the train for Moscow, say (where I had some business to see to,
incidentally), and a fortnight or so in a hotel. She was opposed to this,
wouldn’t countenance it, so I was forced to go and see the aunts, treating
them with courtesy as if they were relatives I was taking her away from.
I yielded and the aunts received their due. I went so far as to present the
creatures with a hundred roubles apiece and promised more, not letting
on to her of course, so as not to upset her with the shabbiness of the
proceeding. The aunts melted at once. There was an argument about the
trousseau: she had nothing, almost literally, but then she didn’t want
anything. However, I managed to persuade her that to have nothing at
all was out of the question, and I bought the trousseau myself—who else
was to do it for her? Well, never mind about me. I did manage to get
some of my ideas across to her, nevertheless, so that at least she was
aware of them. I was in too much of a hurry perhaps. Anyway, the main
thing is that right from the start, however much she tried to restrain
herself, she would come rushing to me with love, greeting me
ecstatically when I came back in the evenings, prattling away (that
enchanting prattle of innocence!) about her childhood, or when she was
a baby, about her parents’ house, her father and mother. But I was quick
to pour cold water over all this rapture. That was the point of my idea. I
responded to these transports with silence, a benevolent silence, of
course … but all the same she soon came to see that we were different
and that I was an enigma—the very thing I was striving for! Why, that
could have been the precise reason, to construct an enigma I mean, that
I embarked on the whole stupid undertaking! First came discipline—it
was in a spirit of discipline that I brought her into my house. Anyway,
there I was, walking about quite happily, as I devised my complete
system. Oh, it took shape by itself, effortlessly. Nor could it have been
otherwise. I was forced to devise this system by circumstances beyond
my control—why, what on earth am I doing disparaging myself! The
system was genuine. No, hear me out, if a man is to be judged, let it be
with full possession of the facts … Listen.
How to begin then, because this is very difficult. When you start
justifying yourself, that’s the difficult part. What I mean is, young
people, say, despise money—so I immediately began emphasizing money
matters; I laid great stress on money. I kept on about it so much that she
began saying less and less. She would open her large eyes wide,
listening, staring, and holding her peace. Young people are high-minded,
the good ones among them I mean, high-minded and impulsive, but they
are intolerant; the least thing untoward and it’s contempt. What I
wanted was broadmindedness, I wanted to inculcate a broad outlook
directly into her heart, instil it into her basic attitudes, you know what I
mean? Let’s take a vulgar example: how could I, for instance, explain my
pawnbroking business to someone of her character? Naturally, I didn’t
put it as bluntly as that, otherwise it would have looked as if I were
apologizing for the pawnshop; no, I made it a matter of pride, as it were,
deploying an eloquent silence. I’m an expert at this. I’ve been doing it all
my life and lived through whole tragedies in silence. Oh, I have been
wretched too, you know! I have been rejected by one and all, rejected
and forgotten, and no one, no one at all knows of it! And all of a sudden
this 16-year-old had got hold of some snippets about me from
disreputable folk and thought she knew everything—meanwhile the
essential truth lay hidden in the breast of this man! I maintained my
silence, especially, especially with her, right up till yesterday—why did I
do that? Simply because I have my pride. I wanted her to discover for
herself, without my intervention, and not from disreputable folks’ stories
—to divine for herself the truth about this man and comprehend him! In
accepting her into my house I required total respect. I wanted her to
kneel before me in prayer for my sufferings—and I merited that. Oh, I
have always had my pride, all or nothing, that was me. Precisely because
I have never countenanced half measures where happiness was
concerned, because I wanted everything—I was compelled to act
precisely in the way I did then, as if to say: ‘Think it out and judge for
yourself!’ because, you will agree, if I had started explaining and
prompting her myself, cringed and solicited respect—it would be
tantamount to begging alms … Still … still, why on earth am I going on
about this?
Stupid, stupid, stupid! With pitiless bluntness (and I emphasize the
word ‘pitiless’) I briefly explained to her that the high-mindedness of
young people was all very fine but it wasn’t worth a brass farthing. Why
so? Because it was cheaply come by, not gained through living
experience, it was all, so to speak, ‘first impressions of existence’*—let’s
see you get down to a bit of work! Generosity that costs nothing is
always easy, even sacrificing your life—even that is cheap because it is
just the fire in the blood and an excess of energy,* the passionate desire
for the fine gesture! No, take on a high-minded deed which is difficult,
quiet, obscure, without outward show, one entailing vilification, one
involving much sacrifice and not a hint of glory—where you, the
illustrious man, the most upright person on earth, are held up to one and
all as contemptible—now then, just you try doing that. No indeed, you’d
have none of it! But as for me, I’ve spent my entire life accomplishing
such a feat. At first she argued with me, indeed she did, then began to
quieten down, altogether in fact, though her eyes were enormously wide
as she listened, big, big eyes they were, all attention. And … and
besides, I suddenly caught her smile, mistrustful, silent, unpleasant. It
was with that smile on her face that I had conducted her into my house.
It’s also true, of course, that she had nowhere else to go …
IV. Plans and More Plans
WHICH of us started it?
Neither. It began of its own accord right at the outset. I said that I
brought her into my house in a spirit of discipline, but right from the
beginning I softened that approach. Even before the wedding, it had
been explained to her that she would have the job of taking in pledges
and handing out the money, and (note this) she said nothing at the time,
did she? What’s more, she set to work with a positive will. Well of
course, the apartment, the furniture—everything stayed as it was. There
are two rooms: one a sizeable drawing-room, with the counter
partitioned off, and the other, also fair-sized, is our living-room and
bedroom combined. My furniture is shabby—even the aunts were better
off in that regard. My icon case with the little lamp is in the drawingroom where the cash office is; I have my bookcase with a few volumes in
it, and my chest, to which I keep the keys; and there’s a bed of course,
tables, and chairs. Before we were married, I told her that to support me,
herself, and Lukeriya, whom I had lured into my household, daily
outgoings on food were not to exceed one rouble: I told her I had to have
thirty thousand roubles in three years’ time, otherwise I’d never make
my fortune. She made no difficulties about this, but I increased the
expense allowance by thirty kopeks unprompted. The same went for the
theatre. I had told my prospective bride that there would be no theatres,
but nevertheless decided to go there once a month, with a proper seat in
the stalls. We went together three times and saw The Pursuit of Happiness,
and Songbirds,* I think it was. (Who cares! Who cares!) We went in
silence and returned in silence. Why, oh why did we get into this habit
of silence right from the start? After all, there was no quarrelling to
begin with, but there was still silence. I do remember, however, that she
would keep glancing furtively at me; as soon as I noticed this, I
intensified the silence. It was really me that insisted on silence, not her.
On her part, there were one or two impulsive outbursts when she would
run to embrace me, but since these were morbid and hysterical, and
what I needed from her was firmly based happiness, combined with
respect, I received them coldly. And I was right to do so: after each such
outburst there would be a quarrel the following day.
Well, there were no quarrels actually, but there was silence and, more
and more often, a bold look on her part. ‘Rebellion and independence’ is
what it was, but she couldn’t carry it off. Yes, that meek face was
beginning to get ever bolder. If you can believe it, she was starting to
find me repulsive, I could watch it happening. And the fact that she had
fits of losing her temper was incontestable. For instance, how could she
suddenly start sneering at our straitened circumstances—she who had
come up from filth and poverty, after scrubbing floors indeed! I mean, it
wasn’t poverty, it was economy; there was an ample supply of what was
essential—linen for example, and cleanliness. Formerly, I had always
fancied that women found cleanliness in a man attractive. Still, it wasn’t
the poverty she meant, it was my supposed miserliness about the
household budget: ‘He’s got it all planned out, has he, showing me how
strong-minded he is.’ All of a sudden, she turned down the theatre visits.
And that derisive look came more and more often … and I emphasized
my silence more and more.
Justify my actions then? The main thing in all this was the
pawnbroking business. Allow me to point out, sirs, that I knew that a
woman, especially one of 16, has no option but to sumbit totally to a
man. Women possess no originality, that’s—that’s an axiom, even now,
even now I regard that as an axiom! Never mind what’s lying out there
in the drawing-room: the truth is the truth, Mill* himself can’t argue
with that! But a loving woman, ah, a loving woman, idolizes even the
vices, even the wicked actions of her beloved. He himself couldn’t devise
the justifications for his evil conduct that she can find for him. It
bespeaks generosity but not originality. Lack of originality has been the
undoing of women. So why, I repeat, why point to that table? Do you
mean to say what lies on that table is original? Oho!
Listen: I was certain she loved me at that time. Why, she still used to
throw her arms round my neck even then. She loved me, in other words,
or rather, desired so to do. Yes, that’s how it was: she wanted to love me,
sought to love me. The thing is, really, that there was no sort of villainy
on my part for her to drum up justification for. You say ‘pawnbroker’,
like everyone else does. Well, what if I am? It follows there must be a
reason if the most high-minded of men turns pawnbroker. You see,
ladies and gentlemen, there are notions … I mean, do you see, if you
come out with certain ideas in so many words, they sound awfully silly.
You feel ignominious. Why is that? No reason at all. Because we’re all
worthless and can’t bear to hear the truth, or something of the sort. I
said ‘most high-minded of men’ just now. It sounds absurd, and yet that’s
how it really was. It’s actually true, the honest truth! Yes, I had the right
to seek to earn my living and open this pawnshop. I thought: ‘You,
people, have spurned me, you have driven me away with silent
contempt. You have responded to my passionate impulse towards you
with an injury that shall last my lifetime. Consequently I am now within
my rights to wall myself off from you, put together these thirty thousand
roubles and end my life somewhere in the Crimea, on the south coast,
among the mountains and vineyards, on my own estate, purchased with
that thirty thousand, and above all, far away from all of you, but with no
malice towards you; with an ideal in my soul and the woman of my
heart, a family, if God so sends—and a source of succour to the
neighbouring peasants.’ Of course, it’s all right for me to say this about
myself now, but what could have sounded sillier if I had described all
that to her out loud? Hence the proud reticence, that’s why we sat in
silence. Because what would she have comprehended? Only 16, the first
flush of youth, what could she possibly have understood of my selfjustifications, my sufferings? What you have is simplistic ignorance of
life, callow, vulgar convictions, the night blindness of ‘splendid hearts’,
whereas what mattered was the pawnshop and—basta!* And surely I was
no scoundrel in the business, surely she could see how I behaved and
whether I overcharged? Ah, how fearful is the truth upon this earth! This
delight, this gentle creature, this heaven—she was a tyrant, the
intolerable tyrant and tormentor of my soul! I am denigrating myself if I
fail to say that! You think I didn’t love her? Who can deny that I loved
her? There was an irony here, do you see, a bitter irony of fate and
nature! We are accursed, the life of man is altogether accursed! (Mine
especially!) Of course I realize now that I went astray somewhere in all
this! Things went wrong. It had all been crystal clear, my plan was as
plain as day: ‘Proud and austere, he suffers in silence, needing no one’s
moral solace.’ That’s the way it was, I wasn’t lying, I wasn’t lying! ‘She
will come to see it herself, that there was greatness of soul involved, but
she has not been able to recognize it for what it was—and when she
eventually does divine the truth, she will esteem it tenfold and fall to her
knees on the ground, her hands clasped in prayer.’ Such was the plan.
But I forgot or overlooked something. There was some matter I failed to
perform. Still, enough, enough of that. And whom to ask forgiveness?
What’s done is done. Brace up man, have some pride! It’s not your fault!
…
Very well, I shall tell the truth, I’m not afraid to face up to it: it’s her
fault, her fault! …
V. The Gentle Creature Rebels
THE squabbling started when she took it into her head all of a sudden to
over-value articles, and on one or two occasions was disposed to enter
into an argument with me on the subject. I declined. However, at this
juncture, the captain’s widow turned up.
The old woman had come along with a medallion—a gift from her
late husband, a souvenir, you know the sort of thing. I gave her thirty
roubles. She started whimpering plaintively, begging me to take good
roubles. She started whimpering plaintively, begging me to take good
care of the article—which we always do of course. Well, anyway, she
came in five days later wanting to exchange it for a bracelet not worth
eight roubles; I refused, naturally. She must have caught something in
my wife’s expression at the time, because she came when I wasn’t there
and my wife exchanged the medallion.
I found out about it the same day and began to talk to her mildly, but
in a firm and logical manner. She was sitting on the bed, regarding the
floor, scuffing her right toe on the carpet (a habit of hers); a disagreeable
smile played about her lips. Then, without raising my voice in the least, I
pointed out that the money was mine, that I had the right to regard life
through my eyes—and that when I had invited her into my house, I had
not concealed anything of this.
She suddenly bounded to her feet, quivering in every fibre and—can
you imagine—started stamping her feet at me; it was a wild animal, a fit
of some kind, it was a wild animal in a seizure. I froze in astonishment: I
had never expected an outburst like this. But I retained my composure, I
didn’t even move; I declared there and then, still in my previous
unruffled tone, that henceforth I would not be allowing her to
participate in my business activities. She burst out laughing in my face
and left the apartment.
The point is, she had no right to leave the apartment. Nowhere
without me, that had been the agreement before our marriage. Towards
evening she returned; I said not a word.
First thing next day, she went out again, and again the day after that.
I shut up shop and went off to the aunts. I had broken with them directly
after the wedding—no invitations either way. It turned out that she
hadn’t been with them. They heard me out inquisitively and then
hadn’t been with them. They heard me out inquisitively and then
laughed in my face: ‘Serves you right’, they said. But I had anticipated
their laughter. I at once bribed the younger aunt, the unmarried one,
with a hundred roubles plus twenty-five in advance. She came to see me
a couple of days later: ‘There’s a former fellow officer of yours mixed up
in this, a Lieutenant Yefimovich’, she said. I was extremely taken aback.
This Yefimovich had caused me more harm in the regiment than anyone
else. Once or twice, a month before, being impervious to shame, he had
called in at the counter, supposedly about pawning something and, as I
recall, my wife and he had started laughing together. At the time I had
gone over to him and told him not to presume to call, bearing in mind
what had passed between us; but no thought of anything like this had
crossed my mind, I merely thought he was being insolent. Now here was
this aunt informing me out of the blue that they had already arranged to
meet, and that the whole affair was being set in train by an old former
acquaintance of the aunts—Yuliya Samsonovna, a colonel’s widow to
boot. ‘It’s her’, said she, ‘that your wife now goes to see.’
I shall not dwell on the matter. It cost me between two and three
hundred roubles altogether, but within two days it was arranged that I
should stand in the next room, with the door ajar, and overhear the first
private rendezvous between my wife and Yefimovich. As a harbinger of
this, a brief—but to me all-too-significant—scene was played out
between the two of us.
She had returned towards evening and sat herself down on the bed,
regarding me mockingly. She began tapping her foot on the carpet. As I
watched her, it occurred to me that over this past month or, more
precisely, this past fortnight, she had been acting wholly out of character
—assuming a totally opposite guise, even: an obstreperous, belligerent
creature had emerged—I won’t say brazen, but wild and deliberately
courting trouble. Asking for it. Her essential meekness, however, was
hampering her. When a girl like that starts to get out of hand, no matter
how much she kicks over the traces, it’s still obvious that she’s only
egging herself on, driving herself, and that she really finds it impossible
to overcome her own modesty and sense of shame. That’s why such
women sometimes overstep the mark in a way that seems incredible
even as you observe it. Those hardened in depravity, on the other hand,
always play things down; their actions are more vile, but are clothed in
propriety and a show of decency, which claims a superiority over your
own.
‘Is it true you were dismissed from your regiment because you backed
out of a duel?’ she asked abruptly, right out of the blue, her eyes
glittering.
‘Yes; the verdict of the officers’ court was that I should be required to
leave the regiment, although I had already applied to resign my
commission before that.’
‘Dismissed on grounds of cowardice?’
‘Yes, that was their verdict. But I did not refuse the duel from motives
of cowardice, but because I did not wish to submit myself to their
despotic verdict and call a man out to a duel when I did not consider
myself insulted. You know’, I couldn’t help adding, ‘to take action
against tyranny of that sort and accept all the consequences meant
demonstrating a great deal more courage than fighting a duel.’
I couldn’t hold back. With that sentence I found myself embarked on a
course of self-justification; and that was just what she wanted, this new
course of self-justification; and that was just what she wanted, this new
humiliation of mine. She burst into malicious laughter.
‘And is it true that you wandered the streets of Petersburg like a
beggar, cadging coppers and sleeping under billiard tables?’
‘I did spend nights in the Vyazemsky House* on the Haymarket. Yes,
it’s true; my life after the army contained much that was shameful and
degrading, though not in the moral sense, because I detested my own
actions even at the time. It was merely a degradation of mind and will,
prompted by despair at my situation. But that passed …’
‘Ah, now you’re a personage—a financier!’
A hit at the pawnbroking, you see. But I had myself well in hand by
now. I could see that she was avid for humiliating explanations from me
and—I declined to give them. A customer opportunely rang the bell at
this moment and I went out to him in the drawing-room. Afterwards, an
hour later, when she had abruptly got herself ready to go out, she halted
in front of me and said:
‘You didn’t tell me any of this before the wedding, did you?’
I made no reply, and she left.
And so, the following day, I stood behind the door and listened to my
fate being decided. I carried a revolver in my pocket. She was dressed up
and sitting at the table, while Yefimovich was posturing in front of her.
Well now, what occurred (I think this is to my credit) was exactly what I
had unconsciously anticipated and presumed would take place. I don’t
know if I am making myself clear.
What happened was this. I listened for a whole hour and for all of that
time I witnessed a duel between a woman of the most exalted nobility
and a worldly, dull-witted creature with the soul of a reptile. I was
overwhelmed; where, thought I, had this naive, submissive, reticent girl
acquired all this worldly wisdom? The wittiest author of high society
comedies could not have devised this scene of mockery, naive laughter,
and the saintly contempt that virtue feels for vice. The brilliance of her
words and interjections; the wit of her swift repartee, the truth in her
condemnations! Yet at the same time so much that was almost girlishly
artless. She laughed in his face in response to his protestations of love,
his gestures, his offers. Having arrived with his crude aproach to the
matter in hand and not anticipating resistance, he subsided. At first I
might have thought she was merely being coy—‘the coyness of a sharpwitted if depraved creature, in order to display herself to better
advantage’. But not a bit of it, the truth shone forth like the sun, leaving
no room for doubt. Inexperienced as she was, she could only have
nerved herself to go through with this rendezvous out of a fancied,
impulsive hatred of me, but as soon as matters reached a crux, her eyes
were instantly opened. Here was a creature rushing hither and yon to
find some way, any way, of wounding me, but having once resolved
upon such a foul proceeding, found the mess that was involved
unendurable. Could Yefimovich or any of those high society creatures
really seduce someone so pure and sinless, cherishing her ideal as she
did? On the contrary, he merely provoked laughter. The truth ascended
from her soul undiminished and her indignation drew forth derision
from her heart. I repeat, by the end this clown was totally dazed and sat
scowling, barely able to respond; I positively began to worry in case he
insulted her out of mean-spirited vengefulness. And I repeat again: to my
credit, I heard out this scene almost without astonishment, as if I had
encountered something familiar. As if I had gone there in order to
encounter it. I had gone believing nothing, no accusation, despite the
revolver in my pocket—and that’s the truth! And could I really have
imagined her behaving otherwise? Wasn’t that why I loved and prized
her? Wasn’t that why I had married her? Oh, of course, at that time I
was utterly convinced of her hatred towards me, but I was also
convinced of her purity. I brought this scene to a swift conclusion by
opening the door. Yefimovich leapt to his feet as I took her arm and
invited her to leave with me. He then recovered his wits and burst into
peals of ringing laughter.
‘Oh, I raise no objection against the holy rites of matrimony, take her,
take her! And look here’, he shouted after me, ‘although no decent man
would fight you, out of respect for your lady I am at your service … If
you want to risk it …’
‘You hear that?’ I stopped her for a moment on the threshold.
Afterwards, not a word the whole way home. I led her by the arm and
she made no resistance. On the contrary, she was horribly shaken, but
only till we reached the house. When we arrived, she sat down on a
chair and fixed her eyes on me. She was extremely pale; although her
lips had at once framed a mocking smile, she looked challengingly at
me, grimly solemn, apparently genuinely convinced in those first
minutes that I was going to shoot her with the revolver. However, I
wordlessly drew the weapon from my pocket and placed it on the table.
She looked at me and at the revolver. (Note: she was already familiar
with this revolver. I had acquired it and kept it loaded from the day I
opened the pawnshop. On starting out in business I had decided against
keeping huge dogs or a husky servant like Mozer does, for example. The
cook admits my customers. But people in our line of work cannot do
without a means of self-defence, just in case, and so I had acquired a
loaded revolver. In the first days after she entered my household she had
been very curious about this gun and asked me lots of questions about it.
I had even explained the mechanism and the way it worked, as well as
persuading her to do some target practice. Do note all this.) Ignoring her
expression of alarm, I lay down on the bed, half-undressed. I felt very
weak; it was already nearly eleven o’clock. She remained sitting in the
same place, without budging, for another hour or so, then she doused
the candle and went to bed, also without undressing, on the sofa by the
wall. This was the first time she had not slept by my side—note that
also.
VI. A Dreadful Memory
NOW that dreadful memory …
I woke up in the morning, some time after seven, I think, and it was
almost fully light in the room. I awoke at once into full awareness and
swiftly opened my eyes. She was standing by the table holding the
revolver. She didn’t notice that I had woken up and was watching her.
All of a sudden I saw that she had started moving towards me with the
gun in her hands. I quickly closed my eyes and pretended to be fast
asleep.
She reached the bed and stood above me. I heard every sound; even
though a deathly silence reigned, I could hear that silence. Now there
came a spasmodic movement and suddenly I couldn’t help involuntarily
opening my eyes. She was staring straight at me, directly into my eyes,
and the revolver was already at my temple. Our eyes met, but we looked
at one another for no more than an instant. I forced my eyes shut again
and made an instant resolve, with all the power at my command, that I
would not make another move or open my eyes, whatever should await
me.
It does actually happen that even someone sound asleep will suddenly
open his eyes, even raise his head for a second and look around the
room, before laying his head back on the pillow and dropping off to
sleep an instant later, with no recollection of the event. When, after
encountering her gaze and becoming aware of the revolver at my
temple, I then abruptly closed my eyes again and lay motionless, like
one in a deep sleep—she might have been forgiven for supposing that I
actually was asleep and had seen nothing, particularly as it was beyond
belief that, having seen what I had seen, anyone could close their eyes
again at such a moment.
Yes, beyond belief. But she could still have divined the actual truth—
that too flashed across my mind in the selfsame instant. Ah, what a
whirlwind of thoughts and sensations raced through my mind in that
split second—thank God for the electricity of human thought! In that
eventuality (I felt) if she had guessed the truth and realized that I was
not asleep, that I had already crushed her by my readiness to accept
death, then her hand might well be unsteady now. Her former resolution
might disintegrate in the face of this new and extraordinary state of
affairs. They say that people standing on high places are somehow
tempted to leap down into the abyss of their own accord. In my opinion,
a good many murders and suicides have taken place merely because a
revolver has been picked up. That too is a kind of abyss, a declivity of
forty-five degrees impossible to avoid slithering down, and something
inexorably impels you to pull the trigger. But her awareness that I had
seen everything, knew everything, and was awaiting death from her in
seen everything, knew everything, and was awaiting death from her in
silence—that might stay her on the slope.
The silence persisted, then all of a sudden I sensed by the hair at my
temple, the chill touch of metal. You will ask: was I so certain of
survival? I will answer, as before God: I had no hope at all, beyond, say,
one chance in a hundred. Why on earth was I just accepting my death? I
would ask: what use was life to me after a revolver had been raised
against me by the creature I adored? Besides which, I knew with all the
power of my being, that a struggle was going on between us at that
precise moment, a fearful duel of life and death, a duel being fought by
that same coward of yesterday, dismissed by his comrades for cowardice.
I knew that, and she knew it too, if she had guessed the truth, that I was
not asleep.
Perhaps that wasn’t the way of it, perhaps I didn’t have those
thoughts at the time, but it must have been like that all the same, even if
unconsciously, because I have done nothing else but think about it every
hour of my life since.
But you will pose another question: why on earth did I not save her
from her wickedness? Oh, I have put that question to myself a thousand
times since—every time, with a chill at my back, I recall that moment.
But my soul was in grim despair at that time: I was about to be
annihilated myself, so how on earth could I have saved anyone else? And
how do you know I wanted to save anyone at the time? Who knows
what I might have been feeling?
My mind was seething, however; the seconds passed, the silence was
deathly; she was still standing over me—then suddenly I quivered with
hope! I swiftly opened my eyes. She was no longer in the room. I rose
from the bed: I had conquered—and she had been vanquished for ever!
from the bed: I had conquered—and she had been vanquished for ever!
I went out to the samovar. We always had tea in the main room, and
it was she who always poured. I sat down to table without a word and
took a glass of tea from her. After about five minutes, I glanced at her.
She was dreadfully pale, even paler than the previous day, and she was
watching me. Then suddenly—suddenly, seeing that I was looking at
her, she smiled wanly, her lips ashen, her eyes looking a hesitant
question. ‘So, she’s still not sure and keeps asking herself: does he know
or not, did he see me or did he not?’ I turned my eyes away
indifferently. After finishing the tea, I closed the shop, went to the
market, and purchased an iron bedstead and some screens. Returning
home, I ordered the bed to be set up in the drawing-room and the
screens put round it. This bed was to be hers, but I said not a word to
her about it. Even without words, the bed made her realize that I had
‘seen everything and knew everything’ and that there could no longer be
any doubt. I left the revolver overnight on the table as usual. That night
she got into the new bed without saying anything: the marriage was
dissolved, she had been ‘vanquished but not forgiven’. During the night
she became delirious and by morning fever had set in. She was confined
to bed for six weeks.
CHAPTER TWO
I. A Dream of Pride
LUKERIYA has just announced that she won’t be staying with me and that
after the mistress has been buried she will be leaving. I have knelt in
prayer for five minutes; I wanted to pray for an hour, but I couldn’t keep
from thinking and thinking, sick thoughts and a sick head—what’s the
use of praying now? It would be sinful! It’s odd, too, I don’t feel any
inclination to sleep: in grief, overwhelming grief, after the first intense
outbursts, one always feels like sleep. Condemned men always sleep very
soundly on their last night, so they say. That’s how it should be, it’s the
way of nature, otherwise one couldn’t stand the strain … I lay down on
the sofa, but didn’t fall asleep …
… During the six weeks of her illness, we tended her day and night—I,
Lukeriya, and a qualified nurse from the hospital, whom I had hired. I
didn’t grudge the money, I positively felt like spending for her sake. I
called in Doctor Schroeder and paid him ten roubles a visit. When she
had recovered consciousness, I began keeping out of her sight. Why
mention that, though? When she was up and about, she would quietly sit
in my room, saying nothing, at a special table I had also bought for her
… Yes, it’s true, we never exchanged a word; I mean we did start after a
while, but it was always just the usual things. Of course, I deliberately
refrained from broadening the conversation, but I became keenly
conscious that she too was glad not to say anything beyond what was
strictly necessary. I regarded that as perfectly natural on her part: ‘She’s
too shaken and crushed’, I thought, ‘and of course she needs time to
too shaken and crushed’, I thought, ‘and of course she needs time to
forget and get used to things.’ So it was that we remained silent about it,
but at every moment I was preparing myself for the future. I imagined
she was doing the same, and I found it terribly exciting to guess: what
exactly is she thinking now?
One more thing: oh, of course, no one can know how much I suffered,
as I sighed over her during her illness. But my groans were inward, and I
kept them suppressed deep within, even from Lukeriya. I could not
imagine, not even envisage that she might die without learning
everything. When she was out of danger and her health began to return,
I recall that my peace of mind came back swiftly and in full measure.
Moreover, I resolved to postpone our future for as long a time as possible,
and leave everything meanwhile in the present tense. Yes, something
strange and peculiar had happened to me, there is no other way I can
describe it: I had triumphed, and the mere awareness of the fact was
enough for me. Thus passed the entire winter. Ah, I had never been as
contented as I was then, and for a whole winter at that.
In my life, do you see, there was one terrible external circumstance
which, right up to the calamity with my wife, weighed upon me every
hour of every day—namely my loss of reputation and departure from the
regiment. Put briefly, it had been a despotic injustice perpetrated against
me. True, my difficult, perhaps even absurd character told against me
with my comrades, although it does often happen, doesn’t it, that
something you privately reverence and regard as exalted can seem at the
same time unaccountably funny to the bulk of those about you? Oh, I
was never popular, even at school. I was never popular anywhere. Even
Lukeriya cannot feel a fondness towards me. Although the regimental
incident was a result of dislike towards me, it was nevertheless
incident was a result of dislike towards me, it was nevertheless
fortuitous. I would add that there is nothing more exasperating and
intolerable than to be undone by some chance incident which might just
as easily not have occurred, as a result of some random aggregation of
circumstances, which might have passed by like a cloud. For a creature
of intelligence, it is humiliating. The incident was as follows.
During a theatre interval I had gone out to the bar. A hussar, A——v,
suddenly entered and, in front of the officers and public present, struck
up a loud conversation with two of his fellow hussars to the effect that
Captain Bezumtsev of our regiment had just created a scene in the
corridor and was ‘apparently drunk’. The conversation petered out and
was in any case misinformed, because Captain Bezumtsev wasn’t drunk
and the scene was actually nothing of the sort. The hussars changed the
subject and there the matter ended, but the following day the story
reached our regiment and it immediately began to be put about that I
had been the only officer of the regiment in the bar and when the hussar
A——v had insolently referred to Captain Bezumtsev I had not gone up
to him and cut him short with a reproof. But why should I? If he had
some sort of grudge against Bezumtsev, that was their private affair—
why should I get involved? And yet the officers began to regard it as
touching the regiment as well, and since I had been the only one of our
officers present, I had demonstrated to all the officers and members of
the public in the bar that there might be officers in our regiment who
were not too exercised concerning their own honour and that of their
regiment. I could not assent to this interpretation. I was informed that I
could still rectify matters even now, if rather belatedly, by formally
settling the matter with A——v. I had no desire to do this and, since I
was in an ill humour, haughtily declined. Immediately after that I
tendered my resignation—end of story. I left with pride, but my spirit
was broken. My will and intellect sank into depression. Just at this
juncture it so happened that my brother-in-law in Moscow dissipated our
meagre resources, my own among them—a tiny portion of the whole, to
be sure, but I was left out on the street without a kopek. I might have
taken civil employment, but did not do so: after that splendid uniform I
just couldn’t go off and work on the railway somewhere. And so, shame
if it must be, disgrace if it must be, degradation too, and the worse it
was, the better—that was what I chose.
Three years of grim memories followed, even the Vyazemsky House.
Eighteen months ago, my rich old godmother died in Moscow,
unexpectedly leaving me, among others, three thousand in her will. After
some deliberation I decided upon my future there and then. I made up
my mind to go into pawnbroking, without anyone else’s by-your-leave:
money, then a place to live and—a new life far from any former
memories; that was the plan. Nevertheless, the dark shadow of the past
and the permanent stain on my reputation tormented me every hour,
every minute. But then I married. Coincidence or not, I don’t know. In
taking her into my house I thought it was as a friend, I really did have
sore need of a friend. But I could see very well that such a friend had to
be prepared, moulded, overmastered even. Could I really have explained
anything just like that to this 16-year-old, full of prejudices as she was?
For example, how could I have convinced her, without the chance
assistance of the grim calamity of the revolver, that I wasn’t a coward,
and that the regiment had unjustly accused me? That calamity had
occurred just at the right time. In withstanding the revolver, I had
avenged all my grim past history. And although no one knew of it, she
did, and that was all that mattered to me, because she herself was all in
all to me, the sum of my future hopes and dreams! She was the sole
person that I was making ready for me, there was no need of anyone else
—and now she had realized everything; she had learned at least that she
had behaved unjustly in so hastily allying herself with my enemies. This
thought enraptured me. I could no longer be a blackguard in her eyes, at
most a rather odd individual, but even that notion, after all that had
passed, was by no means displeasing to me: oddity is not a vice, on the
contrary it is sometimes found appealing by the female character. In
short, I deliberately postponed the denouement; what had occurred was,
for the moment, more than enough for my peace of mind and contained
more than enough in the way of scenes and other material for my
dreams. That’s the wretched thing about it, I’m a dreamer: I had enough
material, and as regards her, in my view she could wait.
So a whole winter went by, in the vague expectation of something
happening. I took pleasure in glancing furtively at her, when she
chanced to be sitting at her little table. She busied herself with sewing
and occasionally read works she got from my bookcase. The range of
books there should also weigh in my favour. She hardly ever went out.
Every day, after dinner, before it got dark, I would take her out for a
walk, and we took our exercise, but not in total silence as before. I
actually did try to pretend that we were not avoiding any topic and were
conversing in friendly fashion, but as I have already said, both of us
made sure the talk was restricted. I was doing this deliberately, in order
to ‘give her time’. It was odd, of course, that it never once occurred to
me until almost the end of winter that here I was enjoying watching her
surreptitiously, and I hadn’t caught a single glance of hers in my
direction the whole time! I regarded that as diffidence on her part.
Besides which, she had such an air of timid submission and weakness
after her illness. No, best to wait it out and ‘she’ll come to you of her
own accord …’.
This thought gave me irresistible pleasure. I would add one thing:
sometimes I seemed to rouse myself deliberately, screwing my spirit and
mind up to the point where I could nurture a resentment towards her. So
matters proceeded for some time. But my hatred could never ripen and
take firm root in my soul. Besides, I could sense myself that this was
really all a game. Even then, although I had disrupted the marriage by
purchasing the bed and screens, I could never, ever look upon her as a
criminal. And not because I took a casual view of her transgression. It
was because I intended to forgive her absolutely, from the very first day,
even before I bought the bed. Actually, that was odd behaviour on my
part because I am morally unbending. On the other hand, I saw her as
being so defeated and humiliated, so crushed, that I sometimes felt
agonizingly sorry for her, though at the same time I did occasionally
relish the thought of her humiliation. The notion of the inequality
between us was an appealing one …
I deliberately carried out a number of good deeds that winter. I let
two people off what they owed, I gave money to one poor woman
without a pledge. And I didn’t tell my wife about that, I didn’t do it
hoping she would find out either; however, the woman herself came to
thank me, practically on her knees. So in this way word got around; I
received the impression that she really was pleased when she heard
about the woman.
But spring was coming on, we were half-way through April by now,
the double window-frames had been removed and the sun began to
illumine our silent rooms with its bright beams. But scales hung before
me and obscured my mind. Fateful, terrible scales! How did it come
about that all this fell from my eyes, that all of a sudden I saw the light
and understood everything? Was it by chance, or did some appointed
day arrive, or did a sunbeam kindle thought and perception in my dulled
mind? No, there was no thought or perception involved, it was a nerve
that suddenly began to twitch; long numbed, it now began to quiver, and
revived to light up the whole of my sluggard soul and my satanic pride.
It was as if I had suddenly leapt up from my chair. And it happened
abruptly, completely out of the blue. It happened towards evening, at
about five o’clock in the afternoon.
II. The Scales Suddenly Fell
A WORD or two before I start. For a month I had marked in her a strange
pensiveness, not silence exactly, I mean pensiveness. This was also
something I noticed suddenly. She was seated at her work, inclining her
head over her sewing, unaware that I was looking at her. Then all at
once it struck me how slender she’d grown, thin, her face so pale, her
lips ashen—all this, taken together with her pensive air, came as a
severe and sudden shock. I had already noticed her dry little cough
previously, during the night especially. I stood up at once and, without
telling her, set off to ask Doctor Schroeder to call.
Schroeder arrived the following day. She was most taken aback and
looked from one to another of us.
‘Oh, I’m healthy enough’, she said, with a vague smile. Schroeder
didn’t examine her very thoroughly (these doctors can often be
didn’t examine her very thoroughly (these doctors can often be
patronizingly negligent) and only told me in the other room, that it was
the after-effects of her illness and it would be no bad thing when spring
arrived to take her off somewhere to the seaside or, if that was out of the
question, to a cottage in the country; in effect, he told me nothing except
that there was a weakness or something of that nature. When Schroeder
had gone, she suddenly told me again, staring at me with the utmost
gravity:
‘I am quite, quite well.’
But saying this she flushed all of a sudden, evidently out of
embarrassment. Obviously that was it. Oh, now I understand: she felt
embarrassed that I was still her husband, concerned about her, as if I
were a genuine husband. But at the time, I didn’t realize this and put it
down to her meekness. (Scales!)
And so, a month later in April, at getting on for five on a bright,
sunny day, I was sitting in the office doing my accounts. Then all at once
I heard her, as she worked at her table in our room, ever so quietly …
start singing. This new phenomenon produced a stunning effect on me,
indeed I don’t understand it to this day. Up till then I had practically
never heard her sing, except in the very first days, when I brought her
home and we could still indulge in high spirits, firing at the target. At
that time, her voice had been quite strong and resonant, a bit uncertain,
but wonderfully pleasant and powerful. Now, however, the song was so
faint—I don’t mean mournful (it was a romance of some sort) but it was
as if there was something cracked, or broken, as if the little voice could
not cope, as if the song itself were ill. She was singing under her breath
and, as it rose, suddenly the voice broke off—such a forlorn little voice,
and it broke off so piteously she cleared her throat and again, ever so
and it broke off so piteously she cleared her throat and again, ever so
quietly, resumed her faint singing…
Some may laugh at my emotion, but no one will ever understand why
I was so agitated! No, I wasn’t sorry for her as yet, this was something of
a different order altogether. I felt a kind of sudden bewilderment, at
least in those first moments, a terrible surprise, terrible and strange,
morbid and almost vengeful: ‘Singing, and in my presence! Can she have
forgotten about me?’
Thoroughly dismayed, I remained where I was, then abruptly got up,
got my hat, and went out, my mind a blank. Certainly I had no notion of
where I was going or why. Lukeriya helped me on with my coat.
‘She sings?’ I couldn’t help asking her. She didn’t take this in and
stared at me uncomprehendingly; I actually was incoherent at that.
‘Is this the first time she’s been singing?’
‘No, she sometimes sings when you’re not here,’ Lukeriya replied.
It all comes back to me. I descended the staircase, went out into the
street, and set off blindly. I got as far as the corner and started staring
into space. People went past, jostling me as I stood oblivious. I hailed a
cabby and directed him to the Politseisky Bridge,* for some reason. But I
suddenly abandoned that idea and gave him twenty kopeks:
‘That’s for your trouble’, I said, with a fatuous laugh, but a kind of
rapture had begun to well up in my heart.
I turned for home, increasing my pace. The cracked, forlorn,
interrupted note again suddenly echoed through my soul. I caught my
breath. The scales were falling, falling from my eyes! If she could sing in
my presence, that meant that she had forgotten about me—that fact was
clear and terrible. My heart sensed it. But the rapture shone forth in my
soul and overcame the fear.
soul and overcame the fear.
Ah, the irony of fate! There might have been, could have been
nothing else in my soul all winter but that same rapture, but where had I
been all winter? Had my soul and I been together at all? I ran up the
stairs in a flurry, I don’t know if my entrance was shamefaced or not. All
I remember is that the whole floor seemed to be undulating and I afloat
on a river. I went in; she was sitting in her former place, sewing with
head bent, but no longer singing. She gave me a fleeting incurious
glance, but it wasn’t really a glance—only a gesture, routine and
indifferent, as when someone enters a room.
I went straight to her and sat down near her chair, like a madman.
She looked swiftly at me, apparently alarmed: I took her arm and I don’t
remember what I said to her, I mean intended to say, because I couldn’t
even talk properly. My voice refused to obey me and kept breaking off. I
didn’t know what to say either, I just kept gasping.
‘Let’s talk … you know … say something!’ I blurted out something
stupid. Oh, did it matter if I made sense? She gave another start and
recoiled in considerable alarm as she stared at my face, but all of a
sudden her eyes expressed cool astonishment. Yes, astonishment, and cool
at that. She stared at me, wide-eyed. This coolness, this cool surprise
shattered me: ‘So you still want love? Love?’ was the question that
surprise seemed to ask, though she remained mute. But I read it all,
everything. My whole being shook as I collapsed at her feet. Yes, I fell
down at her feet. She quickly got up, but I restrained her, gripping both
her arms with considerable force.
And I was realizing my despair to the full, ah, indeed I was! But if you
can believe it, such wild rapture was seething in my heart that I thought
I should die. I kissed her feet in ecstasy and happiness. Yes, happiness,
I should die. I kissed her feet in ecstasy and happiness. Yes, happiness,
boundless and measureless, and all this in full realization of my hopeless
despair. I wept, tried to say something and couldn’t. Her alarm and
astonishment gave place to preoccupation with some idea, some
question of vast import, and she looked at me strangely, wildly even, she
urgently wanted to comprehend something of this and smiled. She was
terribly embarrassed at my kissing her feet and withdrew them, but I
immediately set about kissing the spot on the floor where they had
rested. She saw this and suddenly started laughing from sheer
embarrassment (you know how people laugh out of embarrassment).
Hysteria wasn’t far away, I could see; her hands were shaking—I ignored
that and kept on muttering that I loved her, that I wouldn’t get up, ‘let
me kiss your dress … pray to you all my life like this …’ I don’t know,
don’t remember—then she burst out into sobs and started shaking; a
terrible fit of hysteria had set in. I had frightened her.
I carried her over to the bed. When the fit had passed, she sat up and
with a ghastly dazed expression on her face, seized my hands and
implored me to calm myself: ‘That’s enough now, don’t torment yourself,
calm down!’ and commenced weeping again. All that evening I never left
her side. I kept telling her that I would take her away to Boulogne to
bathe in the sea, now, this minute, in a fortnight’s time, that she had
such a cracked little voice, I’d heard it not long back, that I’d close the
business and sell it to Dobronravov, that everything would start anew,
but the main thing was Boulogne, Boulogne! She listened but her fear
was unabated. Indeed her fear grew and grew. But this mattered less to
me than my overwhelming desire to lie at her feet and kiss the floor
again, kiss where her feet were resting, and pray to her and—‘I will ask
nothing more of you, nothing’, I kept repeating. ‘Don’t answer me,
ignore me altogether, just let me look at you from a corner, regard me as
your chattel, your lapdog …’ She was crying.
‘But I thought you were going to leave me like that’, all at once came
blurting out involuntarily, so much so that she may not have noticed
what she had said at all, and yet—ah, that was the most important, most
fateful thing she had said that evening, and the most explicit; it slashed
me like a knife across the heart! It explained everything to me,
everything, but while she was close to me, before my eyes, I went on
wildly hoping and was happy. Ah, I wearied her terribly that evening; I
knew that, but kept on thinking that I might bring about some sudden
alteration. Eventually, towards nightfall, she became utterly exhausted
and I persuaded her to sleep. She dropped off soundly at once. I
expected delirium and and it did come, but only very slightly. I got up
constantly through the night and came in quietly in my slippers to look
at her. I wrung my hands over her, looking at the sick creature on that
wretched cot, the iron bedstead I had bought her for three roubles. I
would kneel down but did not venture to kiss her feet as she slept
(without her leave!). I would kneel to pray, and then leap to my feet
again. Lukeriya emerged from the kitchen now and again to keep a close
eye on me. I went and told her to lie down and that tomorrow something
‘quite different’ would commence.
And I believed that—blindly, insanely, horribly. Oh, the bliss, the
bliss that flooded through me! I couldn’t wait for the morrow. Above all,
I couldn’t believe that anything at all could go wrong, in spite of the
warning signs. My reasoning powers had still not wholly returned, fallen
scales notwithstanding; nor did they for long enough—until today, in
fact, until this very day! Anyway, how could they have come back to me
then, how could they: she was still alive then, wasn’t she, she was here
right in front of me, as I was before her. ‘She’ll wake up tomorrow and
I’ll tell her everything and she will see it all.’ That was my reasoning at
the time, simple and clear, hence my blissful feelings! Above all, there
was this trip to Boulogne. I kept thinking that Boulogne was everything,
that Boulogne held the final key to it all. ‘To Boulogne, to Boulogne! …’
I awaited the morning in a state of frenzy.
III. I Understand Only too Well
AND that was just a few days ago, you know, five days, only five days—
last Tuesday! No, no, if I’d had just a little more time, if she’d just waited
a tiny bit longer I would have dispelled the darkness! And she had
calmed down, hadn’t she? The very next day she was listening to me
with a smile, despite her bewilderment … The main point was that all
that time, all the five days, she was a prey to bewilderment or
embarrassment. She was afraid too, very much so. I won’t argue, I won’t
be mad enough to deny it: there was fear, but it was perfectly
understandable. After all, we had been alien to one another for so long,
grown apart so far, then all at once, this … But I paid no attention to her
fears, a new sun was shining!
It’s true, indubitably true, that I committed an error. Perhaps a good
many errors. As soon as we awoke the next day, first thing in the
morning (this was on the Wednesday) I at once made a mistake: I
immediately started treating her as a friend. I was in a hurry, far too
much of a hurry, but I had to confess, more than confess, it was a
driving necessity. I did not even dissemble what I had concealed from
myself all my life. I told her plainly that for the whole of that winter the
one thing I had been certain of was her love. I explained that the
pawnbroking business had been merely the low ebb of my will and
reason, a private notion of self-flagellation and self-glorification. I
explained to her that I really had exhibited cowardice back then in the
bar, that this reflected my character and mistrustful nature: I’d been
overwhelmed by the situation, the bar, the thought of how to get out of
it without appearing ridiculous. I wasn’t afraid of a duel, but of fearing
to seem ridiculous … Afterwards I had not wanted to admit all this, and
had made everybody, including her, miserable on that account, and had
even married her to make her life a misery because of it. Altogether I
talked for the most part as if I were feverish. She herself took me by the
hand and begged me to stop: ‘You’re exaggerating … you’re torturing
yourself.’ The tears would start again, bordering on hysteria! She kept
begging me not to tell her of any of this, not keep bringing it back to
mind.
I ignored these pleas or paid them little heed: spring, Boulogne! There
was the sun, our new sun, I talked of nothing else. I closed down the
shop and handed the business over to Dobronravov. I suggested to her
that we distribute everything to the poor, apart from the original three
thousand which my godmother had given me and which would finance
the trip to Boulogne, after which we would return and start out on a new
working life. So it was resolved, because she didn’t say a word … just
smiled. Probably a tactful smile, so as not to upset me. I could see of
course that I was a burden to her, don’t think I was such a selfish fool as
not to see that. I saw it all, right down to the last detail, I saw and
realized better than anyone; the extent of my desperation was obvious to
anyone!
anyone!
I talked to her about myself and about her too. And about Lukeriya. I
talked about my weeping … And I did change the subject too, I also
tried to keep off certain topics at all costs. And she did grow positively
animated on one or two occasions, I remember, I do remember that!
Why do you say that I looked and saw nothing? And if only that had not
happened, everything would have come alive again. Wasn’t she telling
me only the day before yesterday, when the talk got on to books and
what she’d read that winter, she was telling me about them and laughing
at the recollection of the scene between Gil Bias and the Archbishop of
Grenada.* And such sweet, childlike laughter it was, just like before we
were married (an instant! A fleeting instant!); how glad I was! I was
amazed, incidentally, by this about the Archbishop: after all, she must
have recovered a great deal of peace of mind if she could laugh over a
masterpiece as she sat there that winter. She must have begun to recover
her equilibrium altogether, begun to be wholly convinced that I would
leave her like that. ‘I thought you were going to leave me like that’, that
was what she had come out with that Tuesday, wasn’t it? Ah, the
thinking of a 10-year-old girl! And she had believed, really believed, that
things would actually remain like that: she at her table, I at mine, and so
it would be till 60. Then suddenly—I come forward, a husband, and a
husband needs love! Oh, the misunderstanding, my utter blindness!
Another mistake was in looking at her so rapturously; it frightened
her; I should have held back. But I was holding back, wasn’t I? I’d
stopped kissing her feet. I never once made a show of being … well, a
husband—oh, that never entered my head either, I simply prayed! But
after all, I couldn’t just say nothing at all! I told her abruptly that I
enjoyed her conversation, and that I regarded her as incomparably,
enjoyed her conversation, and that I regarded her as incomparably,
incomparably more cultured and mature than I was. She got flustered
and went very red, saying that I was exaggerating. At which point, fool
that I was, I couldn’t refrain from saying how thrilled I had been behind
the door to hear her duel, that duel of innocence with that creature; how
I had enjoyed her cleverness, her flashing wit coupled with her childlike
simplicity of manner. She seemed to give a start, and began prattling
again that I was exaggerating, but all at once, her face darkened as she
buried it in her hands and began to sob … At this point I just couldn’t
hold out: I fell before her again, and began kissing her feet once more,
the upshot being another hysterical fit, the same as happened on
Tuesday. That was yesterday evening, and next morning…
Next morning?! Have I gone mad? Next morning was this morning, a
while ago, just a while ago!
Listen and try to grasp what I am saying: when we met a while ago by
the samovar (after yesterday’s fit) I was astonished at how collected she
was—and she really was, you know! As for me, I’d spent all night
shaking with fear over what had happened that day. But all at once she
came over and stood facing me with folded arms (this morning, just a
while ago!) and began to tell me that she knew she was a criminal, and
that her crime had been tormenting her all winter and did so now … she
appreciated my generosity greatly … ‘I will be your faithful wife, I will
respect you …’ At this, I leapt to my feet and like a madman embraced
her. I kissed her, kissed her face, her lips, like a husband does his wife
after a long separation. Why did I have to go out this morning, even just
for two hours … our passports … Oh God! If I’d only got back five
minutes, five minutes sooner! … There was that crowd outside our gate,
the looks they gave me … Lord in heaven!
Lukeriya says (oh, I’m not letting Lukeriya go for anything now, she
knows it all, she was here the whole winter, she’ll tell me all about it),
she says that after I had left the house and some twenty minutes before
my return, she had suddenly gone in to her mistress in our room to ask
something, I’ve forgotten what, and saw that she had taken out her icon
(that same icon of the Madonna) and it was standing before her on the
table. It looked as if she had just been praying to it. ‘What’s the matter,
mistress?’ ‘It’s all right, Lukeriya, you may go … Wait, Lukeriya’, she
went up to her and kissed her. ‘Are you happy, mistress?’ ‘Yes, Lukeriya.’
‘It was high time the master came and begged forgiveness … The Lord
be thanked that you have made your peace together.’ ‘All right,
Lukeriya, you may go’, she smiled, you know, in a funny way. So
strangely, that ten minutes later Lukeriya came back suddenly to keep an
eye on her: ‘She was standing by the wall, right by the window, with one
arm resting against the wall, and her head pressed against it, just
standing there thinking. So preoccupied was she, that she didn’t hear me
standing watching her from the other room. I saw she was sort of
smiling, standing there, thinking and smiling. I watched her, then turned
and went out quietly, wondering to myself. Then I suddenly heard a
window being opened. I went in at once to say: ‘It’s chilly out, mistress,
be sure you don’t catch cold’, then the next thing I see, she’s got up on
the sill and is standing bolt upright in the open window, with her back
to me, holding the icon in her hands. My heart sank. I shouted: ‘Mistress,
mistress!’ She heard me and moved as if to turn round, but instead,
stepped forward, clutching the icon to her breast, and hurled herself
from the window!’
All I remember is that when I came in through the gate, she was still
warm. And chiefly, that they were all staring at me. At first there was
shouting, then a sudden silence as everyone fell back and she … she lay
with the icon. I recall, as if through a blanket of dark, going up to her in
silence and staring at her for a long time, and everyone crowding round
and saying things. Lukeriya was there too, but I didn’t see her. She says
she spoke to me. I only recall that tradesman: he kept shouting at me
that ‘a handful of blood came out of her mouth, a handful, a handful!’
and pointing to the blood there on the stone. I think I touched the blood
with my finger, staining it, looking at the finger (that I remember) while
he kept on at me about ‘a handful, a handful!’
‘What do you mean, a handful?’ I yelled at the top of my voice and
flung myself at him, so they say …
Oh, monstrous, monstrous! The misunderstanding! How could it be!
It’s impossible!
IV. Just Five Minutes too Late
ISN’T that right? Was it in the realms of probability? It can’t be said to be
possible, can it? Why, for what reason did that woman die?
Oh, believe me, I understand; but the reason she died is still an open
question. She was afraid of my love and asked herself seriously whether
she should accept it or not, could not bear the dilemma, and found it
better to die. I know, I know, it’s plain enough; she had made too many
promises and got frightened that she couldn’t keep them—it’s obvious.
There are some truly horrible considerations involved.
Because for what reason did she die? The question won’t go away.
That question throbs and throbs within my brain. I would have left her
like that if she had wanted things to stay like that. She didn’t believe it,
that was the trouble! No, no, I’m not telling the truth, it’s not that at all.
It’s just that with me she had to be honest: love wholeheartedly if love at
all, not the way she would have loved the trader. And since she was too
chaste, too pure to assent to the love the trader would have wanted, she
didn’t want to deceive me either. She had no desire to deceive me with
half-love masquerading as the real thing, or quarter-love. Too honest,
that’s what! I wanted to inject a breadth of understanding back then,
remember? Strange notion.
I’m terribly curious about one thing: did she respect me? I don’t know
if she despised me or not. It’s terribly odd: why did it never once enter
my head all winter that she might hold me in contempt? I had been
firmly convinced of the opposite, right up to the moment when she had
looked at me in cool astonishment. There and then I realized that she
despised me. Realized irrevocably, for ever. Ah well, suppose she did
despise me, what if she despised me all her life—if only she were alive,
alive now! Just a little while ago she was walking about and talking. I
utterly fail to understand why she flung herself from the window! And
how could I have imagined such a thing five minutes beforehand? I’ve
called Lukeriya. I shan’t let Lukeriya go now, not for anything, not for
anything!
Oh, we could still have come to an agreement. It was just that we had
grown terribly far apart during the winter, but surely we could have got
used to one another again? Why, why couldn’t we have come together
and begun a new life again? I am generous-hearted and so is she—
there’s the point of contact! Just a few more words, two days, no more
than that, and she would have understood everything.
The main thing that outrages me is that it was all by chance—plain,
The main thing that outrages me is that it was all by chance—plain,
brute, blind chance. That’s the exasperating thing! Five minutes, that’s
all, just five minutes and the moment would have passed by like a cloud,
and it would never have entered her head again. And the end result
would have been total comprehension on her part. But now it’s back to
empty rooms, and I am alone again. There’s the pendulum ticking away,
it’s all one to that, it’s not sorry for anyone. There’s no one, that’s the
awful thing!
I am pacing the room, I keep on doing that. I know, I know, no
prompting please; you find it absurd that I’m railing against chance and
a matter of five minutes? But there’s an obvious point here. Bear one
thing in mind; she didn’t even leave a note behind, along the lines of:
‘No one’s to blame for my death’, the way everybody does. Surely she
must have realized that she might even land Lukeriya in trouble: ‘She
was alone with her’, people might have said, ‘So she was the one who
pushed her.’ Had it not been for four people who had seen her from the
windows of the adjoining wing and the courtyard, standing there with
the icon and flinging herself down, they might well have taken Lukeriya
away, innocent as she was. But this too was mere chance, wasn’t it, that
people were standing and saw what happened? No, all this—was a
matter of an instant, just one inexplicable instant. Something sudden, a
fleeting whim! What does it matter if she was praying to the icon? That
doesn’t mean she was contemplating death. The whole business lasted a
matter of ten minutes or so, the whole decision took place precisely at
the time when she was standing by the wall, leaning her head against
her arm and smiling. The notion flashed into her head, started spinning
round, and she couldn’t hold out against it.
It was a plain misunderstanding, say what you like. She could have
It was a plain misunderstanding, say what you like. She could have
gone on living with me. And what about anaemia? Just simple anaemia,
from the exhaustion of her vital energies? She’d got worn out over the
winter, that was the way of it…
I was too late!!!
How thin she is in the coffin, how sharp her little nose has got. Her
eyelashes are like needles. And the way she fell, you know, nothing
shattered, nothing broken. Just a ‘handful of blood’. Meaning a dessertspoonful. Internal injuries. A strange thought: what if I don’t have to
bury her? Because if they take her away … oh no, it’s practically
unthinkable that they should do that! Oh, I know they have to take her
away, I haven’t lost my mind and I’m not raving in the slightest, on the
contrary my brain has never been so lucid—but how can I carry on with
no one in the house again, two rooms again, on my own again among
the pledges? Raving! That’s where the raving comes in! I wore her out—
that’s what!
What are your laws to me now? What is the point of your customs,
mores, your state or your religion? Let your judges sit in judgement
upon me, let me be brought to court, open court, and I will say that I
recognize nothing. The judge will shout: ‘Be quiet, officer!’ And I will
shout back: ‘What power do you have now to make me obey? Why has
grim inertia smashed what was most dear to me? What are your laws to
me now? I part company with them.’ Oh, what do I care!
Blind, blind! Dead and cannot hear me! You cannot know the paradise
I would have girded about you. That paradise was in my soul, I would
have planted it around you! Well, you wouldn’t have loved me—so be it,
what does it matter. Everything would have been like that, everything
would have stayed like that. You would have told me about it as a friend
—we would have rejoiced and laughed happily, looking one another in
the eye. That’s how we would have lived. And if you took a fancy to
someone else—well all right, all right! You would walk with him,
laughing, and I would watch from the other side of the street… Oh
anything would be all right if only she would open her eyes just once!
For one instant, just one! To look at me the way she did this morning
when she stood before me and vowed to be a faithful wife! Oh, in one
glance she would understand everything!
Inertia … Oh, nature! People on earth are alone, that is the calamity
of it! ‘Is anyone alive on the plain?’ shouts the old Russian hero, and no
one responds. I am no epic hero, but I too shout, and no one responds.
They say the sun animates the universe. The sun will rise and look at it
—is it not a corpse? Everything is dead and corpses are everywhere.
Only people exist and around them is silence—that is what the earth is!
‘People, love one another!’* Who said that? Whose behest is that? The
pendulum ticks on, insensible, horrible. It’s two o’clock in the morning.
Her shoes are standing by her little bed, as if they expected her … no,
seriously, when they take her away tomorrow, what on earth am I going
to do?