My FRIENDS congratulated me on my idiot. Hey, that’s nothing,
they said. They embraced me, squeezed me, kissed me on the
cheeks. I smiled vaguely, my head spun, hands and smiles flashed
past; I kissed my friends on the cheeks, embraced them and
squeezed them. The fumes of friendship were intoxicating. In the
sweet steamy vapors my head was a balloon, and my body and legs
a thread wound around a jacket button. I jumped up and down
and twitched. A most strange feeling, I’ll tell you. A revolting state
of instability. That's how I remember myself being on the day of
punishment.
My friends admitted that they'd feared the worst, that indeed
there had been every reason to fear the worst. And suddenly there
you have it: Life with an Idiot. A light punishment, far from oner-
ous, indeed, one could even say that getting off so lightly is not a
punishment at all. It depends, of course, on how one looks at it,
and if one looks at it through the gaping hole of our disjointed
times, then one can divine in such a punishment a secret form of
trust (not all roads are closed to you after all!), a new form of exis-
tence, more of a command than a reprimand. In a word, a mis-
sion. The more so, my friends added, in that you have been given
the chance to choose. They have condescended to grant you an in-
dulgence... This put me on my guard. Surely it was my friends
who were being condescending at my expense? Just for you to
know, I said, life with an idiot is hardly going to be a bowl of cher-
ries! I don't need anyone’s indulgence!
As you will note, there was a broad hint here. Give me back my
punishment. It is my punishment. It is for me to judge it, so you
just squeeze and embrace me, and I shall squeeze and embrace
you as well.
I was full of doubts and anxieties that winter, and the world
toppled over into my paranoia, the boundaries between objects
were eroded; sweetish fumes enveloped everything. My friends
kissed me with new vigor, and I kissed them. So that’s how we ex-
changed kisses. i
Kissing me, my friends said: “Old man, there is good fortune
in misfortune too. It has to be said, you could always have done
with a hint more compassion: you're somewhat lacking’—my
friends screwed up their eyes like true friends—“in that line of
business, in that area...” And my unhappy wife also nodded:
“Somewhat lacking!” “Well, thank God for that,” I said with a
show of emotion, “well, thank God for that! At long last I’ve un-
derstood why I’ve been punished: for not having just a hint more
compassion.”
Everyone laughed. We all took delight in my wit. We clinked
glasses.
We ate lots of tasty food. Once we had quail in sour cream. That’s
how we ate them. And what was wrong with eating quail in sour
cream? In sour cream they were superb, as if they were still alive.
I didn't argue with my friends. I didn't see the point. My ideal of
an idiot was gestating inside me. I had no desire at all to take any
old fool, some imbecile suffering from oligophrenia: a swollen,
porous face, a spittle-drenched chin, the twitching of distorted
hands, wet trousers. Cluttering up the living space and nothing
more. I was dreaming of a totally different type of abnormality—of
a blessed, holy fool type of abnormality, national in both form and
content. I pictured to myself a crafty, staid starets with a little sharp
eye the color of a faded sky. He holds lumps of sugar in his mouth
to sweeten his tea, his visage is radiant and pure, but when the
storm of madness breaks, it’s as if the devil himself is stirring the
waters. An ambivalent sort of wise old man. He wouldn't be too
much bother, and he'd die soon anyway. But you just try coping
with an imbecile, especially if the bastard decides to have a fit...
Well, perhaps my ideal was not totally my own—there were, of
course, some influences, something old, something borrowed:
the parvis of a Zagorsk monastery was there somewhere, and on
top of that from childhood we all drink the same old literary
milk—though naturally I wasn't planning to churn out the same
old stuff to butter parsnips! I decided to pick an old man—since
I’d been given a choice—not for the sake of experiment, and not
for abstract study or a chemical analysis of the milk of our com-
mon wet-nurses (by the time of that memorable winter my pas-
sion for polemics had gone out of the window), in short, I was
planning to choose a blessed simpleton not for the sake of diver-
sion (in the Pascalian sense of the word, of course), but out of
practical calculations intimately connected with the demands of
one’s inner life and one’s gut feeling. For life is a tale told by an id-
iot, gentlemen! There you go—I’m bringing it all up again with a
burp! My most humble apologies.
I had a newish and perfectly tolerable wife. My old wife had
died. From scarlet fever. She was diagnosed incorrectly and
treated incorrectly. She died. I am a widower. And the newish one
died too. Unhappy woman! How she loved Proust! She’d have
been happy just to read and reread Proust till blissful old age and
prepare lovely mushroom juliennes for me. But she was brutally
murdered. Sometimes I mix up my dead wives. Sometimes I
shiver: wait a minute, surely the first one loved Proust? I’m seized
by horror: it seems that they both loved Proust.
Vova, the idiot, leapt into the room, holding in his hand huge
kitchen shears which my wife used—she’d brought the shears
back from East Germany—to give short shrift to game birds. They ~
were her favorite shears, but Vova developed the habit of cutting
his toenails with them. No housewife can be expected to put up
with that sort of thing. And so, just imagine, Vova leaps into the
room, snapping the shears, while I sit, skinny and butt-naked,
and drink tomato juice like a baby. Vova grabbed my wife by her
hair, tipped her onto the soiled carpet and started to clip off her
head. The expression on his face as he was doing this was in-
structive. I got so aroused, I got so aroused, I jumped up and
down in the armchair so much that I spilled tomato juice all over
myself. I banged my breast and shouted to Vova to cut off my in-
flamed organs. “Vova, cut them off! I can't stand it!” Vova was oth-
erwise engaged and didn't even turn around.
“Oh!” he yelled at last and showed me his trophy with that in-
structive look on his face.
I sat there, soaked in tomato juice and cum. I was a widower
once again.
Oh, Vova, Vova! Where are you now, Vova? Where? My weary
heart senses that you are still alive. You'll outlive everyone, my
dear little fool. What will become of you? Whose idiot are you
now? How’s work? You don't get beaten? Because I get beaten,
Vova. He’s a real bastard, you know. He says his name is Kraig
Benson, but I think that he’s a gypsy, he has a gold tooth, and he
only got hold of me because he can really pull strings. He’s mad,
Vova. I know that for a fact. But what can he offer, a mere amateur,
when put next to our proud, select group of professionals?! Adieu,
Vova! This is me—your son.
And now, my dear reader, allow me to return to describing the
events under description. I am a man of letters, I know my worth,
and I'll stick up for my reader. I shall tell you about the good life.
Snow, sun, sea-blue shadows of aspens. Minus thirty-five de-
grees Celsius. The little corpses of frozen children. Silence. But
from time to time, as if totally by chance, from the spreading
bough of a royal fir, a contemporary of the Mongol raids on Old
Russia, a fir-primogenetrix, a fir-mother and great fir-martyr, a fir-
patroness and holy intercessor, whose roots have gone for all time
into the native soil, from the bough will fall a fir-cone, to all in-
tents and purposes looking, as any devoted naturalist will observe,
like a brown sausage of dog shit; the fir-cone falls into the snow,
and snowflakes scarcely visible to the naked eye, myriads of them,
rise up, just as if a miraculous fairy visitor has sprinkled diamond
dust in your eyes, sprinkled and then dissolved in the frosty haze,
and you're left standing in total rapture, bewitched by this mar-
velous apparition, left without the strength to move even an inch,
you stand and wait for the miracle to continue; while a flock of
small songbirds, from the order of sparrows, is already, naturally,
on the scene: the party twitters, its number conversing among
themselves in their funny dialect incomprehensible to man, just
as if they’ve flown in together for a meeting to discuss some busi-
ness of great import to them all. The red-breasted, mustached
cocks twitter, interrupting one another, look, it even seems as if
over there two of them have had a quarrel of sorts, swinging their
wings at one another, while the others seem to be laughing at
them and take the bruisers to task—just as during a meeting in
the director’s office at a metal works two hotheads, two young
bosses from the shop floor, will fly at one another, like fighting
cocks, one shouts: “Youre stopping me from fulfilling the plan!,”
while the other answers: “I don't have no intention to lie down my
Party card on the table and resign just because of you!” But the di-
rector, who has seen many such scenes before, will tap on the
table with his pencil, and the representative of the Party’s district
committee, sitting by the window in an austere outfit, will burst
out laughing in her splendid little male bass, and lo and behold:
these former fellow students, the favorites and pride of the factory,
already regret that they'd got so worked up over this issue; and so,
urged on by their comrades, they rush to each other with embar-
rassed, shamed faces. A purple flush spreads across their cheeks,
and now they are already coupled in embraces, and the director is
no longer able to control his emotions, he says: “You stupid dev-
ils!” and phones through to Moscow; and if you are an observant
phenologist and not simply an unfortunate skier who has lost his
way and is frozen to the marrow of his bones, and who dreams
about only one thing, like a masturbator dreams about the figure
of the vagina, about reaching the forest cutting as quickly as pos-
sible, the cutting leading to the bus stop, and getting on the bus
which will take him to the city, as far away as possible from the
forest miracles, then you will undoubtedly notice that the bull-
finches too have their director who possesses an unassailable au-
thority among the order of sparrows, and that he only has to make
a cracking sound with his tongue for the fight to end, and then
he'll have his say within the framework of this avian flying pro-
duction meeting, so to speak: “So,” he says, “and so, let’s fly fur-
ther,” and the bullfinches will fly on, and with animated, virtually
vernal faces they will glide down and peck out your rapturous, ob-
servant phenologist’s eyes.
So my holy peasant Marei Mareich had to suffer as well. The
idiot’s rest period was over! I was oppressed and pursued by the
image of the air balloon with the thread wound around the button
of a checked jacket. Was I hankering after another tie?
Well, of course not everything here is that simple. Yes, I was
intending to grind my old man, my blessed Simple Simon, in a
mortar like a root of ginseng in order to make from him an elixir
of life; but that certainly didn't mean that I wanted, once I’d got
high, to leap with one bound onto the square of the Heavenly Je-
rusalem, where, as writes the Soviet poet with close links to the
church:
THE RUSSIAN SOUL KISSES GOD ON THE LIPS...
A vile verse, it has to be said. No, an ecstatic theosexual en-
counter didn’t appeal to me. Aesthetics, I suppose you'd say, were
in revolt. Aesthetics sent me to the eye of the needle. I couldn't
pass through, try as I might. I paid the poet a visit. “And how,” I
say, “did you pass through? Why,” I say, “are you silent? Share the
secret with your comrade; answer,” | say, “the question.” He sim-
ply laughs with the most stupid laugh: “Lend me,” he says, “five
rubles for our beloved drink.” He and I drank the bottle, with
Danube salad for zakuski. “My wife,” I say to him, “died from scar-
let fever. Will I ever,” I say, “see my beloved wife Masha again?”
“Youll see her again’—he laughs with the most stupid laugh—
“youll undoubtedly see her, no need to shit your pants.” You'll
never guess what happened next! My stomach tried to overcome
the Danube salad. The Danube salad tried to overcome my stom-
ach. A most unpleasant compromise was the result.
But I didn’t mind at all going off my head, one can even say that
I simply thirsted after going off my head, and in this sense I had laid
great hopes on the old chap, I was betting on my Marei Mareich. |
wanted to go mad, stark raving bonkers—and then we'd see.
And this is pretty much how it turned out, in accordance with
my wish, desire and command. I went bananas and ended up
sprawled on the floor. And how! So many loose screws went flying
after my fall that I’m still picking up the pieces! Ha-ha-ha! But a
big thank-you to dear Kraig. A big thank-you to his lessons. He is
a harsh master. I’m now starting to wield a skillful pen again. I
have drawn near to the truth. And I don't for one minute regret
that I went flying and ended up on my back, on my back—it’s both
good and beautiful! No, I have no regrets. Well naturally, I have a
few—I regret having my teeth knocked out, of course I feel sorry
for the one who was killed brutally, no, her name’s gone from my
mind. Blanks. I’m getting ever closer to the truth, which is why
there are these gaps in my memory. However, I remember, this I
do remember, that Vova clipped off her head with some shears.
This is like a beacon for a memory which has fled the nest. Vova
and I stand in the rays of this beacon. Men naked and aroused,
men who love each other. We are a monument.
Anyway, my newish wife was herself to blame for my picking
Vova. She later said that if she had come with me, then she would
have picked anyone but Vova, that she would never have taken
Vova, that she’d have threatened me with hysterics if I’d tried to
pick him. But she didn't go, just wouldn't start on account of the
severe frost and strong wind blowing from the heart of the Arctic
Ocean, and so | jumped in alongside the taxi driver and arrived at
the place of election on my own.
The guard met me ungraciously, with a roulade of hung-over
bad language.
“You should have come earlier, you motherfucker. I’ve already
locked up.’
I looked at my watch. It was nine-thirty in the morning. I was
amazed.
“On the contrary, I thought that you wouldn't be open yet,a |
said with a polite grimace.
“You thought!” he snorted. “Don’t think. Do as you're sup-
|”
posed to, and don't think!
And he set off, crunching through the snow in his enormous
black felt boots. A junior rank, with his roots among the common
people. For some reason these upstarts always disliked me, for
some reason my appearance always irritated them—I made them
come over all twitchy and nauseous, as if I were a glass of eau de
cologne or a full-blown Jew. I had got used to this and was not bitter,
and I didn't try to suck up, as I had once tended to, as if to say, “Hey,
brothers, what about me, then? Am I not one of ‘us’? I’m a thor-
oughbred, one of us through and through, none of your mother-
fucking gentry blood here!” I simply shrugged my shoulders and
rushed after the upstart, with the promise of a bottle peeping out of
my pocket. He halted, somewhat undecided, weighing up which
was sweeter: power over me or vodka. I hurriedly produced an-
other half liter. His eyes even sparkled. And suddenly something
came over me—not a fit of understanding or pity, no, nothing like
that occurred—I was overcome with an intense hatred of other
races. “That's something new,” I thought, and I felt unwell. “Surely
I can't have left things too late with my Marei Mareich?”
“Let’s go!” said the former son of the soil morosely.
“Let’s go!” answered the whoreson morosely.
And we set off.
It was a large underground chamber, flooded with a dull red
light. On the benches along the walls sat numerous idiots. Others
strutted around the room, parting the choking hot air with their
foreheads. Each was preoccupied with his own business, his own
thoughts, and no one paid the slightest attention to the guard or
to me. All in all there were about a hundred of them.
“Well, then, which one will you take?” asked the guard impa-
tiently.
“Wait a sec,” I said and, without hurrying, set off along the
benches, struggling against the stuffiness. Gathered here were
different folks: youngsters and old men, bags of bones out of
Belsen and bruisers built like brick shithouses, crestfallen, flabby
cowards, choleric fidgets, petrified, rough-hewn, heavyweight stat-
ues. Some muttered, others howled, some sang, others slept, some
gobbled some slime from a bowl, others smiled, staring straight
ahead, while others whimpered, played up, turning their lips in-
side out, others again hunted fleas, some dribbled as they wanked,
others, bound, lay in the corner and were being punished. In the
center of the hall the two young stocky shop-floor bosses—my
friends from my Homeric simile—were noiselessly waltzing, star-
ing deep into one another's eyes, not tearing their eyes away even
for a second. Their eyes held a heavy feeling of otherworldly plea-
sure. I was struck dumb by this hallucination and began worrying.
The sooner I got out of this place, the better!
“How about this one?” asked the guard, who had caught up
with me. He was holding by the hand a fidgety great lump with a
mad convulsive face. On this face were projected, one frame
quickly replacing another, pictures of self-satisfaction (well, just
like I! Duce!), despair, fear, submission, tenderness and God knows
what else. The guard guffawed hoarsely. He had, in all probability,
been joking.
“But do you have any holy fools?” I asked, greeting the joke
with an understanding smile.
“But the whole lot of them are wholly fools,” said the guard, ex-
tremely surprised.
“What I really need, you know, is some sort of blessed simple-
tons
“What, pissing here, you bastard!” roared the guard and gave
the offender a quick pummeling. I set off to search for the holy
simpleton, but whether the caustic reddish lighting, which inten-
sified the ugliness of the faces, was to blame, or whether it was
that the physical diversity of imbecility distracted me, or whether,
simply, I had become stupefied as a result of the stuffiness, but
whatever: at any rate, my Marei Mareich wasn't anywhere to be
found ... My gaze fell on a tall lad about thirty years old. He was
sitting on the bench, with his arms akimbo, and he was singing in
a mocking falsetto:
A birch was standing in a field,
Was standing leafy in a field.
Hey-ho, hey-ho, was standing.
Red hair was falling in front of his eyes. For some reason I
thought that he was blind, but he burst out laughing when he
caught my gaze:
Hey-ho, hey-ho, was standing...
He had a thin, completely human face; only his protruding
ears spoiled the picture which had taken shape in my mind.
“Dont pick that one!” barked the guard from a distance.
“Why not?” I said, losing my temper, and becoming all the
more determined to help the lad out.
“He bites!” explained the guard.
“That’s nothing!” I countered in an icy tone. I was beginning
to sense that this guard was a foe.
“Ow! Ow! Ow!” That’s me shouting. The lad darted lizardlike
down from the bench and, on reaching me, bit me in the calf.
“Ow! Ow! Ow!” I shout. Tears fly from my eyes. I collapsed
into the guard’s embrace, who took me in his arms and neutral-
ized the lad by dealing him a crippling kick in the pit of the stom-
ach. The madmen gathered around us and with great sympathy
looked at me: they were clearly overacting, because they were
madmen and had no sense of proportion.
“To your places!” commanded the guard, and they dispersed.
The lad lay on the floor and, clutching his stomach with both
hands, sang about the birch tree.
“I told you he bites,” growled the guard, taking me away from
the crime scene.
“You've got a trying job,” I said, limping badly on my bitten leg,
and the thought struck me: I have been punished, and will have to
live with an idiot, but he lives with a whole hundred of them. For
what sins? For what salary?
“They are afraid of me,” smiled the guard with the self-
important smile of a lower ranker.
Vova was pacing around the room, his arms twisted behind his
back and all ruffled: five steps forward, a sharp turn on his heel,
five steps back—and another turn. He was wearing worn-out slip-
pers and therefore he was shuffling his feet, but he had a watch
and tie, and his small neat beard, in conjunction with his small
mustache, gave him the appearance of a lecturer in a provincial in-
stitute of higher education who had recently passed his fiftieth
birthday. There’s a certain type of teacher, the secret martyrs of
their own fantasies, ready to hang themselves for the sake of an
idea. They are a dying breed, and they are being replaced by igno-
ramuses and failures. They squeeze out the martyrs of fantasies—
the failures triumph, with their motto of AsH AND DANDRUFF—and
thus it was that Vova had been driven into this cellar, under the
wing of a lower rank. I gazed at him with interest. He did not re-
ciprocate. He was engrossed in his dispute with an imaginary op-
ponent, who irritated him with a supranonsensical string of vulgar
banality, a supravulgar assortment of nonsense, and the promi-
nent forehead of the polemicist was lit up by a blazing dream.
“How could you have picked him? You must be mad!” said my
newish wife in horror. “He has the skull ofa degenerate.”
“His skull has been flattened by the sheer force of his fan-
tasies,” I objected. “His skull’s rather Socratic, I’m sure.”
“What is he, a Bashkir?” asked my wife with typical female
squeamishness. “He’s no Russian, that’s for sure,” she announced
in disgust.
“He'll hear you and take offense,” I said, looking in the direc-
tion of the kitchen; behind the glass door Vova was getting through
a ham sandwich.
“I hate him,” said my wife. “Trade him in for someone else...
I beseech you: exchange him.”
It was as if she had had a presentiment that ultimately Vova
would clip off her head with the shears. I simply spread my hands
helplessly.
“Open wide!” ordered the guard.
Vova stopped and readily opened his mouth.
“Obliging,” nodded the guard approvingly. “Obliging and
bright.”
“How can you tell?” I asked and also looked the dreamer in the
mouth.
“How can I tell? Nothing could be simpler. You see, he did
open his mouth.”
“What's your name and patronymic?” I asked the dreamer po-
litely.
“Oh!” sighed the dreamer, as if he were complaining about the
trials of life in the dull-red light of his world. He was enchantingly
bald.
“OK, so a,chap’s forgotten his name,” the guard said, sticking
up for him. “He’s forgotten it, he’ll remember it again later. Doesn't
it happen to everyone? The chap’s forgotten it...”
“Oh!” sighed the dreamer once again.
“He doesnt say a lot,” I pointed out to the guard.
“He will once he warms up,” promised the guard. “I know
him. Sometimes he comes out with such speeches. About higher
matters. It makes you marvel.”
Well, what a crafty old sod the guard was! He knew how to
hook me! Well, what a crafty old sod!...1 headed for the exit,
spreading my legs wide, like a sailor, so as not to fall over from
dizziness. We emerged from that hellhole into the light of day.
Only then did a most interesting detail make itself known: the re-
maining hairs, the mustache and the beard of the dreamer turned
out to be reddish. A redhead! What luck! We stood on the thresh-
old of a new life. I signed for him in a school exercise book, small
and well thumbed, and paid the guard off with a nice fat tip.
“What should I give him to eat?” I inquired anxiously, as if I
were a boy who's just bought a goldfish in a pet shop.
“Shit!” screamed the guard with laugher.
We parted friends. If I had known... But no! I will be the pat-
tern of all patience. I will say nothing! I loved you, people. Report
from the gallows—it’s happened before. Vova, joy of my life, light
of my life, where are you? The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, Vova,
the ceremony of innocence drowned.
That’s how Vova became mine.
Now, my dearest reader, I shall tell of how I became his.
It didn't all happen at once, it didn't happen suddenly, but only
after a long floral siege. In the beginning Vova was very quiet: he
merely shuffled his slippers and built himself up. He loved having
a bottle of drinking yogurt for breakfast and liked eating cottage
cheese. He would sit modestly in our little kitchen and feed, then
he would shuffle his slippers around the room a bit—five steps
forward, five back—and once more into the kitchen, where he
might peck at some sausage, or treat himself to ham. When he
ate, his look would become evil, feline, but he didn't take anything
without our permission, and he didn't raid the fridge. The guard
had duped me. Vova didn't open up. He was a real silentiary, he
was unwilling to speak out, and didn't use any words other than
“Oh!” I tried more than once to strike up a conversation with him,
I set about questioning him about who he was and where he was
from, what he had taught and where—by now I’d utterly con-
vinced myself that he was a professor. I even spread out a map of
the USSR before him, so that he could show me his native lands,
but Vova merely ran his finger meaninglessly over the map, sigh-
ing quietly and mumbling quietly. Driven to despair, I didn't
pester him any more, and he retired into himself completely. But
something was, clearly, ripening within him, some thoughts,
some dreams were draining him. He moaned at night, woke up
frequently and, on occasions, he would sit in the dark on the ot-
toman for hours on end, narrowing his already slitty eyes and
propping up his little tuft of a beard with his fist.
“Why aren't you asleep?” I would ask, poking my head out of
the adjoining room.
“Oh!” Vova would answer dreamily. “Oh!”
I dreamed about entering his dreams. In the evenings, to stop
Vova from suffering from insomnia, we would go for a stroll
through the snow-covered lanes. Vova would look piercingly at the
passersby. They would be frightened of him for some reason, they
stood aside, and then they would turn around and look back at
him. Perplexed or even, I would say, panic-stricken faces. What
was the matter? What was it about Vova that unnerved the casual
evening townsman? I couldn't put my finger on it. Weeks passed.
Everything was as before: an uneasy, newish wife, a quiet Vova
and I—a fine lad, in essence...
Once, on returning home, I chanced upon the following
scene: Vova is sitting on the kitchen floor in a large puddle of
milk, surrounded by foodstuffs he has just thrown out of the
fridge; he sits there and gobbles everything in turn. One minute
he’s biting off a lump of cheese, the next he’s shoving his hand
into a jar of vegetable salad, then he crunches a wafer, and then he
fancies a frankfurter, and then I see that he’s spread red whortle-
berry jam all along the frankfurter. He sits there, cheerful and
- pleased with life. I gave him a scalding—he frowned, lay down on
the ottoman and without any sign of repentance quickly fell asleep.
My wife was a bundle of nerves.
“I just knew it!” she said tearfully with a certain somber
Schadenfreude. “I just knew it!”
I phoned my friends. They were distressed. They were indig-
nant. They kissed me down the telephone and said: “Stand firm!”
They asked me to drop in and try a pizza. “I’ve swapped my bird
for a pizza!” droned a friend’s voice. I laughed terribly. A few days
later Vova tore into the books. He ripped up a good half of the li-
brary which I had put together so lovingly; scraps of pages dear to
me clogged up the bath and the lavatory pan. And it wasn't just the
lavatory pan! The whole apartment was strewn with this sacrile-
gious confetti.
“What did you do that for?” I roared in despair.
“Oh!” said Vova mournfully. But I saw how happy he was, I
could tell by his eyes, by his impudent red eyes.
“Idiot...” I moaned.
He nodded his degenerate’s skull understandingly.
“If you understand that you're an idiot,” I said maliciously,
“then that means that you're not an idiot, but an arrant knave.”
“Let’s tie him up,” suggested my wife. She was inconsolable:
Vova had ripped up all of Proust! “Let’s tie the bastard up.”
Vova gave a terrified howl.
“No, let’s kill him instead,” I suggested in a cold-blooded voice.
Vova gave an even more terrified howl. The suggestion terri-
fied my wife also. All three of us were terrified and didn’t know
what to do.
I declared martial law. I instituted the strictest surveillance of
Vova. He grew somewhat quieter, but didn't give in: he was wreck-
ing and sabotaging things on the sly. Suddenly objects started
mysteriously vanishing: shirts were lifted and disappeared, shoes.
went for a walk, toothbrushes, kitchen utensils. Suddenly, one
fine day, he dumped a huge pile in the middle of the room and
from then on things really took off: he smeared feces on the wall-
paper, he ripped the wallpaper, he urinated in the fridge, he took
a knife to the parquet floor and to the furniture. He farted and
committed unforgivable crimes. He stripped right off, he paced
around the apartment butt-naked, five steps forward, five steps
back, his ginger groin gleaming, and something totally unthink-
able raised its head: a gigantic claret-veined worm twitched on his
scorched autumn grass... He turned out to be a strong one, this
Vova, and he couldn't have given a toss for the martial law which
had been declared against him. In fact he had declared martial law
against us. Against me, a totally peacefully person, a convinced
pacifist—I’d last fought when I was fourteen, in the seventh
grade, or perhaps when I was twelve—and against my brand-new
wife, the lover of Proust and of the innocent pleasures of married
life, in comparison with which the claret-veined vision grew into a
crisis of Sodomitic proportions. ss
Vova sat on the telephone and crushed it. The link with the
outside world was cut. We barricaded ourselves up in the adjoin-
ing room and went into hiding; but my wife and I were at odds.
We were at each other’s throats. Instead of making us close ranks,
misfortune tore us apart. My wife was becoming less and less
bearable. I too was a shadow of my former self. I just couldn't put
my finger on it. Why had Vova become so impudent? Why had he
exploded now, like a delayed-action mine? Or was it that there, in
the underground, they trained idiots to become torturers? Or was
it my misfortune, my bad luck—just a random catastrophe?! Surely
it couldn't just be pure chance?...
“How could you have picked him?” my wife kept repeating.
Vova was running riot on the other side of the wall.
But why was it, then, that the passersby knew more than I did,
why did they tremble so on meeting Vova, as if his mug were fa-
miliar to them, as if there were bad memories connected with that
mug shot? I didn’t understand anything.
A crash was heard. Breaking glass. The chandelier had fallen
to its death.
“Lord, but why am I suffering as well, and for what?” implored
my wife.
“So you also think that I’m to blame!” I yelled.
“You've ruined my life,” she bristled. “I don't want this! I don't
want this! No! You're a monster!”
“I’m a monster? Oh, what a bitch you are! How can you say
that!”
But sometimes she said:
“Well, do something, then! Please, I’m begging you...”
And at long last I did something. At night Vova would drum
on the door of our room and would howl, howl, howl. The stench
of feces and sperm wafted under the door (recently Vova had been
- masturbating frenziedly, like an adolescent...). He grew hoarse.
I leapt out of bed and jerked the door open. He was standing in
front of me massaging seminal fluid into his red-haired chest.
“Yl kill you, bastard!” I yelled at the unshaven face, which was
distorted by its obscene convulsions.
A huge sticky paw crashed down on my shoulder. Vova threw
me to one side, like a toy poodle, and I smashed into the doorjamb
and fell in a crumpled heap. He nimbly grabbed me by the legs
and dragged me out of the bedroom. I was about to... The lock
clicked shut.
I was smashing the door with my fists. In answer to my wife’s
cries I smashed my fists. Forgotten her name. How could I forget
her name? Blanks...I ran into the kitchen to look for the bread
knife, I kept stabbing it into the door—and kept hearing heart-
rending howls, they kept growing—they were both howling, my
wife and Vova, they howled heartrendingly, as if 1 were driving the
knife into their flesh, and not into the door—that’s how they were
howling together, and suddenly all at once everything went quiet,
everything went dead, and the deep unpeopled night ruled once
more. I chucked the knife away and went into the bathroom to
wash with cold water.
The next morning my wife came into the kitchen. A long or-
ange dressing gown, toweling, with a hood. I looked at her pale,
dismayed face.
“It’s monstrous,” she said, lowering herself onto a stool, and
reached for a cigarette. The poor thing’s hands were shaking.
I nodded and, unable to contain myself, burst out laughing.
Vova cleaned up his act a lot and hardly ever shat on the floor. He
stopped going around naked, as he didnt see the need anymore,
and in the mornings, whistling, he would shave his high cheek-
bones. My wife bought him a pink shirt and gave him her beige
foulard. Vova wore a felt hat when he went out for his walks with my
wife. Life was getting back to normal. I slept on the ottoman, with
cotton wool stuffed in my ears. In the mornings I would be woken
by the smell of coffee. My wife would prepare breakfast. A dressing
gown with a hood. The three of us would drink coffee together. One
day Vova presented me with a little bunch of violets. Spring had ar-
rived. The pavings were shining. The shadows were black, and not
sea-blue, as they had been in January. A little bunch of violets
bought at no little expense at the market.
“That’s sweet of you,” I said, flattered by the attention.
“Oh!” yelled Vova, overjoyed.
For spring I got hold of a light overcoat for him, made abroad,
in Hungary. Why shouldn't he show off a bit?! And I bought a load
of Proust from a profiteer in books. A grateful wife buried herself
in books when she had the chance.
Then Vova gave me tulips as a present.
“He’s a dear, don't you think>” asked my wife.
Then some strange-looking flowers, resembling birds’ heads.
Then tulips once again, tulips. Lilac, red, yellow.
“But why does he give you flowers?”
“Jealous, eh?” I smiled.
Vova helped me hang a new chandelier. He was an efficient
helpmate.
“Tell me, Vova,” I asked him, “were you or weren't you a pro-
fessor after all>”
“Dont offend him,” said my wife. “Don't traumatize Vova.”
Vova walked up to my wife and clipped her around the ear
hole. I was pleased. That’s how our male fellowship started to take
shape. But at night they belonged to each other, and I would block
my ears with cotton wool.
“Not more tulips!” said my wife, amazed.
“He’s a sweet,” I said.
“Watch out or he might screw you by mistake,” joked my wife,
somewhat aggrieved.
“Watch out or he might stop screwing you,” I joked in return.
Outside it was May. Vova talked to me in tongues of flowers.
“I’m pregnant,” said my wife. She was standing in her orange
toweling dressing gown with the hood, and I thought: there’s a
type of flower, what on earth are they called, marrygolds or some-
thing ...? And once again her cigarette trembled in her fingers.
Vova was sleeping sprawled on the couch in happy languor.
“It’s uncanny that I’m pregnant,” said my wife confidentially.
“The thing is that Vova has his own proclivities. I’ve respected
them and, I won't deny it, bent over backward to meet them. But
pregnancy was therefore explicitly excluded! ...”
“Life with an idiot is full of surprises!” I noted good-heartedly.
“He isnt an idiot!” exploded my wife. “Youre the idiot! Yes,
you! You! Idiot, with your irony, your friends, your callousness
and arrogance... He’s purer, more innocent, more spiritual than
you! I feel like a woman with him, I shall feel like a mother with
him. I want to have his baby! I love him. I’m keeping his baby.
And don't you dare accept flowers from him! Don't you dare!”
She burst into tears.
“Ravings!” I said. “Incoherent, hysterical ravings. The ravings
of a helpless fool who's off her head! You should listen to your-
self!...Go on, then, have his baby! Go for it! See if I care!” I
yelled. “Give him a child, good luck to you!”
In the evening I saw Vova stroking her belly tenderly. They
billed and cooed and made plans. Then they screwed long and
hard, all night long.
“Oh!” Vova yelled rampantly.
“Oh!” my wife echoed rampantly. I was intrigued. Which pro-
clivities of Vova had my wife bent over backward to meet? How
splendidly, I must say, she’d learned to yell, “Oh!” I thought, in my
deliberations about proclivities, but I was slow on the uptake and
chaste, like any intellectual, and I dozed off without finding out
the answer to my question.
Then my wife had an abortion and returned home, shaken by
the shamelessness and filth of the women who had undergone
with her this operation which has quickly become a literary staple.
“That is, you just can't imagine it!,” to which I answered, “It’s of
no interest to me.” But Vova didn't grasp straightaway that she’d
had an abortion, and kept on stroking her empty scraped belly and
shaven haven, which looked like a new recruit, and this was very
funny, I simply rolled about with laughter. Then he realized what
had happened to his little baby, why it wasn’t giving any signs of
life, it finally got through to the fool that the belly was empty, and,
flying into a rage, he battered her during the night. I woke up, de-
spite the cotton wool in my ears. I lay there and listened to him —
beating her. He was giving her a sound, thorough beating, using
his fists; she just yelped a little, like a faithful bitch, who under-
stands that she’s being given probably what she deserves. | felt
sorry for her.
The next morning Vova brought me an armful of carnations. I
was sitting in the bath with shampoo in my hair, reflecting on the
meaning of life. I didn’t want to die. He threw the carnations into
the water. Cumbersome flowers past their prime, implanted on
web-footed little stalks, swam circles around me. I came over all
embarrassed and covered myself with my hand. Vova stroked me,
like a father, on my soapy head and, bending over, kissed me on
the shoulder. His little beard pricked me. It was ticklish and—not
at all what I expected. Overcome with bashful agitation, I said:
“OK, beatit?
But he didn't stir. The carnations were whirling around; they
weighted heavily on my heart. Having washed off the shampoo, I
started plucking them out of the water.
“Oh!” uttered Vova strangely, and suddenly, through the flow-
ers, I caught sight of heavy, purple-veined outlines. They were re-
pulsive, these outlines, they were so repulsive, rude and material
that they looked tempting, they held the allurement of wild thug-
gish strength, they held that which we seek in vain in women's
private, mingy, sacrificial nothingness—a feeling of dignity. One
felt like taking them in hand and taming them. Revulsion was in
need of some sort of revolutionary resmelting. The revulsion was
so material and dense, the beauty so fragile, unsteady and trans-
parent, but this beauty was growing: as on a pile of rubbish a fire
takes hold, and its tender little tongues lick the rotten stinking
rags, they feed on carrion, they tremble in the wind; it is beautiful,
this flame, it gets stronger, it is stronger than abomination, it has
nothing to do with abomination; and the flame devours the rubbish
heap, an orange torch in the evening sky, the children run to it—
what a cause for celebration! Fire! Fire! Ding-dong! Ding-dong! It
brought back memories from childhood: a happy fairy tale, where
the beautiful princesses are nothing more than hags, stupid women
with titties and with mugs flushed in the public bathhouse—
remembrance of naked things past, lost, forgotten glimpses—and
where the proud men provoked one’s greatest envy.
“OK, beat it.”
But he kept on tarrying and didn't move, he was in no rush to
go, he just wouldnt be off, and tarried.
My Vova! My punishment!
O, orifice of croup! O, PAIN, eclipse of Europe...
Well, and now, scum-sucking reader, whoever you are, a friend
or a reptile or aesthete, a snob or from the mob, one of the black
masses or a scarlet guard, whatever life may lie ahead for you, or
whatever death may be waiting for you, remember this: I don't
care about your verdict; I’ve gorged myself on happiness, like a
glutton who's stuffed himself on pancakes and caviar, and your
judgment is that of a paupers’ court, whereas my life’s rich with
meaning, I’m a millionaire from the goldfields of the Lena River,
and my loads of money, rich inner life and warm fur coat keep out
the Siberian cold!
Vova and I lived in a state of harmony, tenderness and volup-
tuousness, giving each other modest presents: sweets, multicol-
ored balloons, flowers, oranges and passionate kisses—as a son
lives with a father, when they are both Natural Born Poets by the
Grace and Will of God, and there was no one in the whole wide
world happier than us.
We made our home in the adjoining room, having put at my
wife’s disposal the expanse of the dining room, the ottoman and
Proust, fraternal attention and fraternal unsullied love. Did we
not get down on our knees before her, begging for a little tear of
indulgence toward'our happiness? Did we not surround her with
filial respect? Were we not ready to bang our heads against a brick
wall just in order to please her?
But she said, “No!”
No! No! and No!
She said, “You are a pair of scum-suckers, you are degenerates,
you are slime and bastards, you are corrupters of each another
and of the law.” ds
She offended us, but we didn't say a single nasty word to her,
we simply waddled out in single file: Vova first, with me bringing
up the rear, we withdrew into the bedroom and, lying on the bed,
_ grew dispirited.
“And you, Vova, are a particular bastard,” shouted my wife
from the other side of the door.
“Oh!” Vova threw his arms apart in despair and desperation.
“Oh!” I groaned.
Days passed. She was ruining everything and tearing every-
thing up: she tore the curtains, Proust, my old love letters to her—
we just shrugged our shoulders; she shat on the carpet, like an
invalid—we pretended not to notice. We were above this, we didn't
care about the stench. But even the gods’ patience eventually
_ snaps. So we beat her up, not very painfully, we stripped her
clothes off for fun and beat her up, laughing loudly at her stupid
titties, which bounced up and down friskily as we pounded her,
but she lost consciousness nonetheless—and then her titties be-
came totally ridiculous, and we even shed a few tears over their
terminal stupidity.
She started starving us. She didn't grant us access to the food.
We became emaciated from mutual love and from hunger. Hunger
was arousing us. We were gigantic caryatids propping up an agi-
tated sphincter. We were thin, happy men with bums turned inside
out. But even the gods’ patience eventually snaps.
“I really hate you,” my wife would say to Vova, her eyes
a-goggle. We beat her up once again. Bitch! We’ve only winged
this bird! Till she was black and blue in the face!...No effect
whatsoever! But it was sweet. We exchanged glances. We em-
braced, and it was sweet. We prodded each other in the stomach.
Suddenly my wife declared to Vova:
“Either him or me!”
“That’s a fascist way of popping the question,” I noted
gloomily.
“What do you need him for?” my wife asked Vova. “OK, you've
had your fun and games, now call it a day!... He won't give you a
child in any event. What’s the point of him? But I will bear you
a son.”
“You've had one child already!” I observed.
“You will have a son, Vova,” my wife said with conviction. “You
will be proud of him.”
“I am your son, Vova,” I said timidly.
My wife burst out laughing. A laugh of pure contempt. For a
second or so I lost faith in myself, in Vova’s and my mutual
love... It was a second of unforgivable weakness. Vova saw all
this and grew sad. My wife built on her success. She smelled of
woman. Vova pulled pensively at his little red beard: five steps for-
ward, five steps back. Either/or. He didn't take long over his deci-
sion.
He ran into the room. The shears snapped. I was sitting in
the armchair with a glass of tomato juice. I was drinking greedily.
She boldly went toward Vova. Her body suddenly seemed to me
so desirable, and I cried out in joy:
“Wait! I want her!”
Vova gave a smile in response to my cry. He wasn't a jealous
guy and placed a high value on people’s passions. But he made a
terrible sign, which signified: AFTER. I was gripped by horror.
No! But my wife boldly made for the shears. Vova made for my
wife, red-haired, intelligent, dear, just like a tank.
“I love you,” my wife said to Vova in complete ecstasy. “I love!
I love you, Vova.”
Vova grabbed my wife by the hair—she had fair, shoulder-
length hair—twisted her hair around his hand and tipped her
unto the soiled carpet. He pressed his knee into her chest. We
were all as naked as newborn babes.
- “Tlove...” wheezed my wife, in loving admiration of Vova.
Vova quickly started cutting off her head with the shears.
“Oh!” Vova cried at long last and lifted up his trophy by the
hair.
I sat there, covered in blood, tomato juice and cum. The
strongest sexual impression imaginable. I know who I am. I am
Renoir.
And so, my dear reader, I became a widower for the second
time. The wheels knock. I am walking along the narrow corridors
of railway carriages, I fiddle with the loose handles of the heavy
metal doors between carriages, beneath me I see the silver rib-
bons of the rails, the smell of the railways is in my nostrils. I am
going to the restaurant car to eat a railway burger and to wash it
down with beer. Soon will be the hustle and bustle of midday
Kharkov; I am free, I am sad; I have just buried a wife who died
from a childhood disease.
Vova took the body by the legs and tried to tear it to pieces. He
was strong, my Vova, but he wasn't able to tear it apart. Then he
mounted the body on himself. He bellowed. I closed my eyes. I
am very, very tired. And AFTER I’ve finished, I say to him:
“Take her away.”
Wearily—he was also tired!—he grabbed her by the foot and
lugged her onto the landing on the stairs, toward the refuse chute.
He drags her toward the refuse chute like a large imported doll. I
see the sweep of his freckled back. Vova! ... I never saw him again.
Blanks! Blanks!...I passed through the dull red light. The
guard greeted me like I was one of the family. I bit and sang in a
mocking falsetto:
A birch was standing in afield,
Was standing leafy in a field...
I bit like an adder. I lost a lot of teeth. Yes, I was that tall lad
with the protruding ears and the completely human face. Kraig
Benson picked me, the fake foreigner. Instead of diplomatic im-
munity he offered me the lash and order. I’m grateful to him! I’m
now starting to wield a skillful pen again. I write about you, Vova.
My Vova! My punishment! Give me back my punishment! And if
he has died—no, you will never die, Vova—if he has died, tell me
where his grave is. I shall bring him an armful of spring tulips.
We are a monument, Vova, wrecked by warring whirlwinds. I hear
the swan song of my revolution.