WITH REFERENCE to your inquiry, most esteemed Spiridon Ermo-
laevich, to wit, requesting information about the fate determined
for your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich Spirkin, who compelled a
dead bird to fly in defiance of natural law, my reply will not be
forthcoming immediately. But why? Why, my dear sir, because I
must confess: I am confused. My breast was bursting with emo-
tions as I read your petition, written in the blood of fatherly feel-
ing. You have deeply vexed me, Spiridon Ermolaevich, deeply
agitated me! You have cast such a cloud of melancholy over me
that no words can describe it, only the howl of a beast. However, I
bear no grudge toward you. My bosom echoed in response to your
fatherly urge to protect that son of yours, Ermolai Spiridonovich,
from the full force of the law, as you hint in obscure terms that
your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich, so you assert, had from his early
years a deep love for those of God’s creatures capable of flight. I
am willing to grant that your hint is correct. Nay, I shall even go
further. Every child has a weakness for birdies, whether this is ex-
pressed in catching them in the coppices, the forests, and also in
the open fields with springes, or in buying them for copper coins
at the bird market, in order to set the birdie in a cage, especially if
it is a songbird. The law sees nothing wrong in such activities and
indeed displays indulgence toward children in their innocent
childhood amusements. This is of course the case, but, joking
aside, world culture, my right honorable Spiridon Ermolaevich, as
I most humbly understand it, thinks predominantly in symbols,
the interpretation of which is the task of learned men. From an-
cient times, for example, it has been fashionable to read the au-
guries in the guts of birds that had been flying by. On the other
hand, if any live bird were to fly into your room, albeit the hum-
blest goldfinch, would you welcome such an event, Spiridon Er-
molaevich? No, you would not welcome such an event! And why?
I shall tell you why: because you will see in this a terrifying sym-
bol. I could give you many more similar illustrations of man’s ig-
norance, except that I’m hastening to reach my conclusion, which
bears a certain relation to your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich: viz., a
bird is a creature that disturbs the soul, a bird is an enigmatic
creature, not subject to our whims, and it therefore follows that it
is not to be trifled with. And meanwhile what is your kid up to?
He is kidding around! Ermolai Spiridonovich deigns to kid
around with a dead parakeet—a particularly suspect type of bird to
boot! A parakeet is already a symbol in its own right, and the Devil
himself would be stumped to come up with an adequate interpre-
tation of its meaning, insomuch as all world culture from its very
inception has done nothing but gossip about the parakeet as its fa-
vorite idol. What’s more, it’s a foreign bird. Yet you, Spiridon Er-
molaevich, with a lightness of touch which would be far better
employed elsewhere, dash off in your petition that your little boy’s
prank bore an entirely innocent nature. Really, it’s no big deal! My
son, you say, Ermolai Spiridonovich, took a parakeet whose name
was Semyon and who had. gone to his last resting place, nimbly
THE PARAKEET °¢ 77
climbed up onto the roof of your very own home, which is to
be found on Swan Street, and began throwing it upward into the
air, like Ivan the Fool from the fairy tales, in the hope that in its na-
tive element the dead creature would get its second wind, flutter
and chirp, that is, in a certain manner of speaking even come back
to life. If one judges by your overhasty words, Ermolai Spiri-
donovich’s deed owed everything to a lack of understanding and
nothing to any criminal intent, owed everything to an overactive
imagination, a nervous disposition and shaking spasms through-
out his body, and nothing whatsoever to a coherent plan of in-
trigue. At the same time you are, it goes without saying, outraged
and disgusted by his actions and offer to give your own sonny, Er-
molai Spiridonovich, a damn good lashing, with no leniency what-
soever. No two ways about it: fatherly feelings! I repeat again: we
have no quarrel with you, Spiridon Ermolaevich. You are a re-
spected man and remain so for the time being. But be so good as /
to try to understand us as well, who have served the fatherland for
many years also, put yourself in my boots, for example. For what
if such experiments become more common, what will happen
then? And what if that foreign crap had flown? According to the
statement made by your mad son, Ermolai Spiridonovich, it did in
fact flap its nasty wings a few times, that is, made some sort of at-
tempt at resurrection! So what if suddenly, against our expecta-
tions, it had gone and completely resurrected itself? What words
could we have found to explain such an awkward and unusual sit-
uation to our well-intentioned and trusting fellow countrymen? I
shudder to think how it all might have ended.
HOW WOULD WE HAVE LOOKED THEN?
Ah, yes! No question about it! Your son turned out, Spiridon
Ermolaevich, to be delicately built, one could even say frail. We
marveled. Who does he take after? “Well sir, well then, young
man,” J inquired of Ermolai Spiridonovich, having examined him
carefully, “answer me this question: why did you dig up the bird
from its place of burial or, to put it another way, from the midden?
Why the hell, I’d like to know, did you exhume it?” He answered
evasively, but promptly and with unquestionable politeness, saw-
ing the air with his little white hand during his answers, using his
hand, that is, to make it all easier to understand. On observing
such manners, I was immediately put on my guard. I see that not
only his build but his manners are unusual too, almost perfect
manners. There isn't a bit of Yid in him by any chance, Spiridon
Ermolaevich? He kept on trying to win us over, helping himself, if
you please, with his little hand—a real sight for sore eyes, one
might say! But the trick didn't work—we're not in the circus now!
And I’m sitting there thinking to myself: this baby’s tarred with a
different brush! What sort of story was emerging from his words?
What picture was taking form? “Tell me about it,” I say, “from the
very beginning, and stop waving your pasty white hand in front of
my nose, | can't stand it!” He was profuse in his apologies, as
though I were in need of his apologies, as if he were doing me
some huge favor by apologizing! But I say nothing about this.
However, in the meantime, I ask him: “So you, Ermolai Spiri-
donovich, wanted to resurrect this bird. But this bird, according to
reliable information received from competent sources, had al-
ready been pretty much devoured by earthworms, didn’t you no-
tice? White worms, looked just like your fingers? It was all covered
in worms, and ants were participating in the feast in equal mea-
sure. So how could such a bird hope to be resurrected? Didn't you
feel just a teeny-weeny bit squeamish about taking it into those
nicely kept hands of yours!?” He answers, head bowed: “But what
about the Phoenix?” I see, my dear sir, Spiridon Ermolaevich,
your little son is very bright, Ermolai Spiridonovich, bright be-
THE PARAKEET ¢ 78
yond his years. Well, I never, the Phoenix! “Where,” we ask, “did
you obtain such information about some sort of Phoenix, what
sort of bird,” I say, “is that?” “Well,” he says, “it was a red-feath-
ered eagle which flew from Arabia to ancient Egypt; there, when it
had reached the ripe old age of five hundred years, it would burn
itself alive, and then it would be reborn from its ashes young and
healthy, so that worms needn't necessarily be an obstacle here.”
He’s a smooth operator, I can see that. “I see. So what,” I ask, “do
you see as the point of this fable about the red-feathered eagle?
How,” I ask a supplementary question, “did you manage to come
to the pass of believing wop fables?” Once again his answer is eva-
sive: “A fable,” he says, “is supposed to be amazing.” “Don't you
wriggle,” I say, “don't conceal anything from us, otherwise you'll
end up starring in your own fable! Give us, hooligan, the truth.”
“But I am,” he shouted angrily, “telling you the gospel truth!” and
once more he flapped his hand. “OK, have it your way: speak, and
we'll just sit here and listen to what you have to say. But don't get
angry and dont shout. Who,” I say, “do you think you are shouting
at? At whom, so to say, are you raising your voice?! I’m old enough
to be your father, Ermolai, and yet you've taken it into your head to
yell at me!” He is silent. He turns red. “Am I old enough,” I ask
him, “to be your father, or am I not?” “Of course you are. And I ad-
dress you as I would my very own father.” Well, I never, I think to
myself, he’s calling me father now, he’s thrusting forward and say-
ing yes yes yes like a randy tart. There’s more to this than meets
the eye. So I investigate further. “So this parakeet of yours, this
turquoise-hued Semyon—he too, no doubt, was also some sort of
symbol, yes?” Everything in world culture, Spiridon Ermolaevich,
is a symbol, nothing but symbols, wherever you care to look,
parakeets in particular. But he, your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich,
in answering explains it all as a consequence of the weeping of
children. He tells us a story we know well: how this parakeet
called Semyon kicked the bucket in the family of the Physician to
the Boyars Agafon Elistratovich, your neighbor on Swan Street,
who had purchased the foreign bird to amuse his two young
_ babes—five-year-old Tatyana Agafonovna, and the three-year-old,
snot-nosed toddler Ezra Agafonovich. He bought it, as is proper,
at the bird market, from the Dutch merchant Van Zaam, or as we
call him, Timofei Ignatievich. This merchant, Timofei Ignatievich,
is in no way remarkable, he is mild-mannered, apart from the scar
on his Dutch nose, which he received after arriving in our neck of
the woods and realm as a result of a minor domestic dispute with
his wife. I am letting you in on these details so that you may know,
Spiridon Ermolaevich, that I earn my daily bread: you ‘can't re-
create the full picture without the details, especially when there’s
some monkey business afoot. Accordingly, your neighbor, Agafon
Elistratovich, bought this foreign parakeet of small build, proba-
bly because he was too stingy to buy a bigger bird, and christened
it Semyon. They confined the bird, as is right and proper, in a
cage. They fed it, according to Tatyana Agafonovna’s statement,
on millet. But this parakeet, sadly notorious for its, thank God,
unsuccessful resurrection, utterly refused to eat millet or indeed
any other bird food, exhibited foreign ways and, the efforts of the
children notwithstanding, started to turn up its toes as a result of
declaring a voluntary hunger strike. On the third day Semyon
popped its clogs to the mixed chorus of tears from Tatyana Aga-
fonovna and Ezra Agafonovich, the three-year-old, snot-nosed
brat, who, the bastard, still hasn't started talking yet, or pretends
not to be able to. The death agony lasted for three and a half hours,
sometime after lunch, and ended with the bird’s dying a natural
death.
These are the terms in which your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich,
describes the story, after which he himself becomes its main hero.
But not straightaway. As is right and proper, after the bird died the
THE PARAKEET @ 81
ceremony of burying it in the midden was held, so as to prevent
the spread of disease. A small crowd of some twenty-six ugly
mugs gathered at the burial, drawn there by the howls of the
physician's youthful brats. As Ermolai Spiridonovich (who partic-
ipated in the funeral procession as an observer) has told us him-
self, the night before the procession he had heard all sorts of
voices in his head, despite the fact that Physician to the Boyars
Agafon Elistratovich had promised his children to buy them some-
thing even more amusing to replace the dead parakeet, something
like a billy goat. Next morning Ermolai Spiridonovich left the
house with the firm intention of freeing the bird from its chilly
grave at exactly the time when it started drizzling, making the
streets dirtier, and Mademoiselle Shelgunova distinctly saw from
the window of her parents’ home, in a break between her lessons
on the harp, how your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich, dug the para-
keet out of the midden with his nails, looking for all the world like
a mangy cat, which, you know, feels like treating itself to some tasty
carrion.
The following disgraceful chapter is already somewhat famil-
iar to you, dear Spiridon Ermolaevich, judging by your precipitate
inquiry, one that is completely incredible coming from a man of
your stature and experience. But really, tell us, how did you man-
age to rear such a mad brain, and what’s more, one who would go
on to become in consequence a real troublemaker? How? You
pass over this in silence as you supplicate on your son's behalf, but
one would like to know all the same, so as to discourage the oth-
ers. I for my part twigged straightaway, the moment he came
before me, that he wasn't one of us, his show of allegiance notwith-
standing, and so I say to him as soon as he finishes: “And now,
sonny, tell us what really happened.” “That really is what hap-
pened,” he argues with me, “it is,” he says, “the whole truth and
nothing but the truth!” “I bet you,” I say, “that it isn’t!” My Jolly
Rogers are standing in the doorway, in their red caps, having a
good laugh. “Hey,” I say, “hold it there, my Jolly Rogers, it’s too
early for you to be grinning yet, perhaps this young man will think
again, and win from me one hundred rubles, and an honorable
booting out into the street, and freedom into the bargain.” “No-
no”—my good fellows shake their heads—“he won't win, he’s as
dishonest as the day is long, wherever did they dig up such a liar!”
“Sssh!” I say. “It’s not yet your turn to’be laying down the law!”
and I turn to address your dear son, the sweet young adolescent,
moving close to him: “Too hot to handle, eh, Ermolayushka?” Er-
molai says, recoiling from me: “I have nothing more to say to you.
I’ve told you everything. But I didn't do anything bad, believe
me...” “So it turns out to be the case, apparently, that it was sim-
ply out of some childish pranks that you decided to dig up the
bird, is that it, Ermolayushka? You dug up the bird, and leapt nim-
bly up onto the roof. You whisper sweet nothings in its ear, ‘Now
fly, my Semyon, fly, my pretty! fly, my little dove!’ And at this point
the worm-eaten turquoise Semyon parakeet flapped its turquoise
little wings, flapped them a couple of times in the futile hope of
returning to its former life. Aha!” I said here, finally losing my
temper. “Aha, there’s your SYMBOL, Ermolayushka!” “There’s no
symbol here!” cried out your son, the sly rogue, Ermolai Spiri-
donovich. “There isn't!” “Well, you go and tell that to the
marines...” “Why is it,” asks Ermolai Spiridonovich, “that you
keep on seeing symbols everywhere you look?” I didn’t reply im-
mediately, but looked more intently at your young man, Spiridon
Ermolaevich, and then I answer after wiping my bald patch with a
handkerchief, and say, “Well the reason why I keep seeing them,
my splendid Ermolai Spiridonovich, is that world culture, forgive
me, Lord, from its very inception, as we are assured by the most
learned of men, is stuffed with symbols, and there’s no way we
can leap out of this cage, try as we might!” And I struck him, your
THE PARAKEET ¢ 83
hazel-eyed son, I punched him right in the teeth, wholeheartedly,
because I suddenly felt sad, as a prophylactic measure, and that
fist of mine, well, you know yourself, Spirry. And his little teeth
went flying in all directions like pearls falling off a broken
thread—they scattered and rolled along the floor. We were silent...
When dear old Ermolai Spiridonovich regained his thoughts, he
looked at me with his toothless grin in amazement. “What,” he
says, “have I done to deserve such treatment?” “Don't cry,” I reas-
sure him, “they were only milk teeth, weren't they?” My Jolly
Rogers are standing in the doorway in their red caps, splitting
their sides with laughter. But Ermolai Spiridonovich himself isn't
jolly at all, he counts his losses, he doesn’t even smile at my joke.
“It’s the done thing,” I admonish him, “to smile when your elders
joke with you, especially when they’re old enough to be your fa-
ther. Why, you yourself,” I exclaim, “taught us to laugh at jokes,
what with that trick of yours with the parakeet!”
We tortured and tormented your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich,
we interrogated him zealously, using all the tools at our disposal,
we can do no other, we haven't been taught differently. We were
shocked by the frailty of his build! Fragile goods! For the most part
we used methods of torture which gladden the heart. We sub-
merged him headfirst, for example, in a pool of manure and we
suggested that he might like to swim around a bit; we impaled
him, blindfolded him, we were joking, naturally, and instead of a
stake we used the male member of our giant Fedka, who goes by
the nickname of The Honorable Fedka. Do you remember him,
Spiridon Ermolaevich? He remembers you most well, he says that
when you were nippers you played together once at bat and ball,
along with Sashka Shcherbakov, who drowned in a hole in the ice
last winter. We also introduced ants into his prick; we pumped air
up his asshole, inflated him like a frog, with the help of an Eliza-
bethan pump; we tore his nostrils and fingernails with pliers; we
called some bawds and asked that he, Ermolai Spiridonovich, lick
their poxy wounds, just in case this might heal them. He licked.
Well, what else would you like to know? In the end we tore off the
balls—had no use for them. Threw them to the dogs. So at least
they didn’t go totally to waste. And what would he need them for?
Do you and I, dear Spiridon Ermolaevich, want to have progeny
from such a one? I think not. And then he completely overreacted
to this loss too, he got really angry and started swearing as soon as
he regained consciousness. He was saying that we were inhuman
monsters and savages, which is hurtful even. Of course, there’s
nothing wrong with cursing on the rack, everyone does that, but
there’s no need to hurt people’s feelings, is there? We are not free
agents, we are obeying orders, we fulfill important commissions
out of a sense of professional duty, and for that he calls us, so to
say, savages. No, my dear friend, it’s you who are the savage in the
fullest sense of things, you're the one who went against the world
order, not us, and on the rack people say what’s really on their
mind! Just as drunks tell the truth, so on the rack the truth is in
whines! And consequently, my supposition in relation to the fact
that he is not one of us, my dear sir, was being reinforced with
every passing hour. I, thank God, know this business, I earn my
daily bread, and that’s why, therefore, I have a good sense of how
our people scream on the rack and how those who are not one of us
scream. One of our people would never call me a savage, because
that’s not what he thinks, but your bastard came out with it. And
he behaved, I regret to inform you, without much spunk. No
sooner had he gone through the pool of manure and puked his
guts out than he started begging for mercy and, like a little child,
was promising that he wouldn't do it anymore, and that he in-
tended, he said, not to give himself airs in the future, to behave
quietly, that he would be an enthusiastic servant of the state. That
is all very well—but who needs his repentance? But we asked him
THE PARAKEET ¢ 85
nevertheless: “Dispel,” we say, “our doubts with regard to the res-
urrection of the parakeet nicknamed Semyon. Perhaps you and
your neighbor, Agafon Elistratovich, had had some disagree-
ments?” He squealed that there hadrit really been any disagree-
ments as such, but the physician, he said, was a real old soak, and
that when he treated people his hands were trembling. But we’ve
heard so many good things about Agafon Elistratovich, and so we
responded to this denunciation concerning his chronic drunken-
ness with the utmost indignation. More to the point, how is one to
explain that not even three full days had passed from the purchase
of that parakeet when the said parakeet started to peg out, suffer-
ing terrible convulsions, as if someone had poisoned it, and that
even before that it had seemed to be pining away, it didn't chirp
and had turned down all food? Wait a minute, I think, let me con-
sider this carefully. I wiped my raspberry-colored bald patch with
a handkerchief and, following up on this, I ask Ermolai Spiri-
donovich, your son, having first clutched his scrotum in a vise (his
testicles were at this moment still attached to him), as a precau-
tionary measure: in case he tried to deceive me. “Wait, wait,” I ask,
“werent you the one, scumbag, who poisoned the foreign bird in
an attempt to vex your neighbor, the Physician to the Boyars Aga-
fon Elistratovich, and also those broken-hearted children of his,
Tatyana Agafonovna and Ezra Agafonovich?” “No,” replies your
son Ermolai Spiridonovich, his eyes popping out of his head from
pain, “no! No-o-o!!” But his little eyes had gone white—we're bit-
ing our lip, that means that we're in pain—“No-o-o...I mean
ye-e-s!” We squeezed harder, struggling to work out: is that your fi-
nal answer? “Yes! Yes! It was me!” Ermolai Spiridonovich shouts
at me, as though he thinks I’m deaf. “I did it! I did it,” he says, “in
order to vex him!!!” “Well, that’s great. To vex him—but why?”
“Oh,” he shouts, “that hurts! stop it!” He’s twitching all over, poor
chap. “Stop it! I can’t think like that!” “You don't need to think,” we
say, “just give us the answers...” Still, we eased up a bit, because
we feared that otherwise he might do serious injury to his tongue,
and how would he speak to us then? “The reason I wanted to an-
noy him,” he explains, “is that I don't like him.” “Why?”—we
pressed him a little more firmly on this. “Well, naturally because,”
he yelled out, “he was a faithful servant to the fatherland!” “Now
we're getting somewhere!” I say. “Now why didn't you say all that
earlier? Fine, have a rest, my dear chap...” And as soon as he'd
had a bit of a rest I say: “But perhaps you wanted to poison Agafon
Elistratovich as well as the parakeet?” He is silent, thinking. And
I was literally just about to start putting the squeeze on him when
he comes out swiftly with his answer: “Yes!” So there you are, you
can see yourself it’s an open and shut case we’re dealing with
here, my respected Spiridon Ermolaevich! We decided, however,
- not to make a rush to judgment: we are suspicious people, pardon
my French. So on the following morn we took him to have some
fun on the rack, that’s of use to him, for he’s a bit of a stooped one,
your son, Spiridon Ermolaevich, it wouldn't harm to stretch him
out longer for good measure. This is a real killer, this activity, I in-
form you, it’s particularly funny if it’s a wench, but I must say that
your son is a delicate fruit, so he’s as good as a woman, if not bet-
ter... While I do not presume to exhaust you further with details,
allow me instead to make one digression of a strictly philosophi-
cal nature. You and I, Spiridon, would be pretty poor philoso-
phers, nay, we would be deceivers, if we failed to note mar’s great
passion for torture and all its works. Why does our state protect its
loyal subjects from arbitrary rule, arbitrary violence and petty
tyranny? Why, the reason why it protects them against all this is
that otherwise there wouldnt be anybody left alive in this country,
because they would already have tortured and exterminated one
another beforehand...To give an example: my dick doesn't get
very excited by women, it doesn't really see any difference in the
THE PARAKEET «¢ 87
minimal variations between them, having tried more than its fair
share; but no sooner do I really get down to business with a man,
with the authority of the state fully behind me, there’s nothing I
can do about it, it reaches for the sky, and in fact sometimes I get
so worked up that I cream my hose, and my woman thinks I’ve
been playing away from home, but she’s wrong: I’ve been at
work...This passion is a deep mystery, and for the most part
philosophers pass over it in silence, hiding their head in their
shoulders, like ostriches; this mystery is a more serious business
than turning your finger in some mossy hole, here your guts get
turned inside out, Spiridon, but nobody knows why. Yet at the
same time I also love humble martyrs who merely fart and
whinny on the rack, I respect them, and I would never ever swap
one such martyr for a hundred Englishmen, for enduring tor-
ture and suffering are things pleasing to God, but what’s an
Englishman—a piece of shit, that’s all he is! Or let us take, for ex-
ample, the prophet Elisha, who was once teased by children who
called him a bald old coot. Come hither, chrome head! .. . The of-
fense was not great: every decent man ought to have a bald patch.
And Elisha did not speak a single word in anger to the children,
and he set two she-bears on them, and the bears tore the forty-two
children to bits...Exactly, brother Spiridon, here’s food for
thought! Yet you keep on writing your inquiries, you do not fail to
pester us with messages, wasting paper. That a man will sell
everything and everyone is something I am utterly convinced of,
but the approach mustn't be rushed, you mustn't scare him off,
just give him time! But we are not given enough time, we are hur-
ried, rushed, pressured to get results. That’s why mistakes occur
occasionally in our line of work, and from these mistakes, Spiri-
don, civil disobedience grows...
So now, please judge for yourself, Spiridon Ermolaevich, what
would have happened if that worm-eaten parakeet had taken
wing? HOW WOULD WE HAVE LOOKED THEN?! As it was, ac-
cording to the words of the troublemaker, it flapped its little wings
a couple of times, although later on the rack he renounced these
incautious words of his. But then again he, the parasite, was
telling porkies like there was no tomorrow by that point! In one
version, can you believe it, he himself poisoned the parakeet; an-
other time he says that he and Agafon Elistratovich were in it
together to try out the poison; another time he even went so far
as—I’m telling you this in confidence—to denounce you by
claiming that you, that is his very own father, Spiridon Ermolae-
vich, were the one who persuaded him to exhume the rotten crea-
ture. It was on hearing this (or could it have been earlier?) that we
tore off his nuts, so that he would no longer take his father’s name
in vain, especially without good cause, we tore them off and threw
them to the hounds, a tasty morsel for them... And he agrees to
anything, he’s ready to sign anything, to affirm whatever we say,
no matter what, he replies to every question in the affirmative.
What is the use of that, I ask you? We realize that he’s trying to
confuse the investigation, to send us off on false leads and to con-
ceal the shameful truth. But, after taking a few wrong turnings, at
the very least we all concurred in our opinion that the reason why
your son Ermolai Spiridonovich wanted to resurrect the parakeet
was to show that this foreign bird was superior to our sparrows,
and to lessen thereby our national pride and show us up before
the whole world in a ridiculous and unbecoming light. When both
we and Ermolai Spiridonovich had agreed on this joint conclu-
sion, we embraced in celebration: All's well that ends well! Bring
us, my lads, viands and victuals, let’s party! And our good fellows
bring us sea salmon, piglets and lambs, various soufflés, and wine
that has the ribald name of Milk of the Mother of God. We started
eating and started chewing the fat. . .
However, I have a vague suspicion that you, Spiridon, in-
THE PARAKEET @ 89
flamed by fatherly feeling, which naturally we don't hold against
you in any way, are interested further in finding out what hap-
pened next to your son, the unforgettable Ermolayushka, whom I
remember with such fondness. Well, what could have become of
him? Nothing became of him. Everything, thank God, worked out
well. Early one morning, yes, about five o'clock, just as the sun
was rising and turning the onion domes of our holy churches to
bright gold, he and I slowly ascended the bell tower, hand in hand.
We marveled at the view. Capital City stretched before us in a
sweet morning sleep and mist, the cocks were crowing and the or-
chards were rustling. The grain storehouse, the public squares,
the hooting of steam trains, the university—everything was in its
appointed place. The river ran through the city like a silver snake,
and on the higher bank, on the other side, stood a forest—a sight
for sore eyes, no mistake about it! And the aroma rising up from
the grasses, Spiridon! The smell of clover, Spiridon, it’s such a
strong smell! “Beautiful!” I said as I looked around. “Beautiful!”
said Ermolai Spiridonovich. I looked at him from the side. Only
one word for him: handsome! Even his morning-after-the-night-
before pallor was starting to acquire a subtle blueness which only
enhanced his appearance. Led astray through no fault of his own
by lusty demons, his hour of liberation had now arrived, and, fore-
seeing the new life to come, he already looked just heavenly.
“Well, Godspeed!” I said and led him by the hand to the bell
tower’s parapet. “Fly, Ermolayushka! Fly, my pretty! Fly, my little
dove!” Stretching his arms out in the form of the cross, he stepped
out and swallow-dived into the emptiness. For a second I was tor-
mented by doubt: what if he soars like a turquoise parakeet, to the
demons’ great delight? Holding on to the handrails, I leaned over
and looked down somewhat anxiously. Thank God! Smashed to
bits! I see he’s splattered splendidly, he landed with a real plop,
nay, even to the extent that there are tiny pieces of brain scattered
all over the pavement like a ripe sun melon. My good fellows in
their red caps rushed to put Ermolai Spiridonovich in a body bag.
I crossed myself.
Cheer up, Spiridon Ermiolaevich! Don't let it get to you! It’s not
as if he’s worth it! Don't feel sorry for the bastard! He also pointed
the finger at you, but I’ve filed that particular piece in my own spe-
cial place, well away from prying eyes, I didn't allow it to circulate.
As soon as your fatherly feelings cool down a bit, do call on me—
we'll go to the bathhouse, have a steam, drink some beer. My mis-
sus brews some strong beer, it’s got a real kick! Just drop in, no
need to make an appointment. And you'll still have time to sire
some little children, you're a man in good working order for now,
I dare say, even if you are getting on a bit. And if you don't father
any kids—it’s not the end of the world, youll get by! We won't
grow short of heirs! But your son, Ermolai Spiridonovich, he, of
course, went directly to paradise: a martyr’s place is always in par-
adise, even if he’s a martyr for an unjust cause. And he’s looking
down on us from there tenderly, he’s amusing himself with his
turquoise parakeet, he strokes its feathers, and gives thanks. When
you think of this, when you imagine such a scene, you even envy
him, honest to God, Spiridon...oh, well, fair enough, balls to
him, let him be happy...