For the fourth time in as many years they were confronted with
the problem of what birthday present to bring a young man
who was incurably deranged in his mind. He had no desires.
Man-made objects were to him either hives of evil, vibrant with a malignant activity that he alone could perceive, or gross comforts for
which no use could be found in his abstract world. After eliminating a
number of articles that might offend him or frighten him (anything in
the gadget line for instance was taboo), his parents chose a dainty and
innocent trifle: a basket with ten different fruit jellies in ten little jars.
At the time of his birth they had been married already for a long
time; a score of years had elapsed, and now they were quite old. Her.
drab gray hair was done anyhow. She wore cheap black dresses. Unlike
other women of her age (such as Mrs. Sol, their next-door neighbor,
whose face was all pink and mauve with paint and whose hat was a
cluster of brookside flowers), she presented a naked white countenance
to the fault-finding light of spring days. Her husband, who in the old
country had been a fairly successful businessman, was now wholly dependent on his brother Isaac, a real American of almost forty years
standing. They seldom saw him and had nicknamed him “the Prince.”
That Friday everything went wrong. The underground train lost its
life current between two stations, and for a quarter of an hour one
could hear nothing but the dutiful beating of one’s heart and the rustling of newspapers. The bus they had co take next kept them waiting
for ages; and when it did come, it was crammed with garrulous high
school children, It was raining hard as they walked up the brown path
leading to the sanatorium. There they waited again; and instead of
their boy shuffling into the room as he usually did (his poor face
botched with acne, ilf-shaven, sullen, and confused), a nurse they
knew, and did not care for, appeared at last and brightly explained that
he had again attempted to take his life. He was all tight, she said, but a visit might disturb him. The place was so miserably understaffed, and things got mislaid or mixed up so easily, that they decided not to leave their present in the office but to bring it to him next time they came, She waited for her husband to open his umbrella and then took his arm. He kept clearing his throat in a special resonant way he had when he was upset. They reached the bus-stop shelter on the other side of the street and he closed his umbrella. A few feet away, under a swaying and dripping tree, a tiny half-dead unfledged bird was helplessly twitching in a puddle. During the long ride to the subway Station, she and her husband did not exchange a word; and every time she glanced at his old hands (swollen veins, brown-spotted skin), clasped and twitching upon the handle of his umbrella, she felt the mounting pressure of tears. As she looked around trying to hook her mind onto something, it gave her a kind of soft shock, a mixture of compassion and wonder, to notice that one of the passengers, a girl with dark hair and grubby red toenails, was weeping on the shoulder of an older woman. Whom did that woman resemble? She resembled Rebecca Borisovna, whose daughter had married one of the Soloveichiks—in Minsk, years ago. . The last time he had tried to do it, his method had been, in the doctor’s words, a masterpiece of inventiveness; he would have suc- ceeded, had not an envious fellow patient thought he was learning to fly—and stopped him. What he really wanted to do was to tear a hole in his world and escape. ; The system of his delusions had been the subject of an elaborate paper in a scientific monthly, but long before that she and her husband had puzzled it out for themselves. “Referential mania,” Herman Brink had called it. In these very rare cases the patient imagines that every- thing happening around him is a veiled reference to his personality and existence. He excludes real people from the conspiracy—because he considers himself to be so much more intelligent than other men. Phe- nomenal nature shadows him wherever he goes. Clouds in the staring sky transmit to one another, by means of slow signs, incredibly detailed information regarding him. His inmost thoughts are discussed at nightfall, in manual alphabet, by darkly gesticulating trees. Pebbles or stains or sun flecks form patterns representing in some awful way mes- sages which he must intercept. Everything is a cipher and of everything he is the theme. Some of the spies are detached observers, such as glass surfaces and still pools; others, such as coats in store windows, are prejudiced witnesses, lynchers at heart; others again (running water, storms) are hysterical to the point of insanity, have a distorted opinion”

of him, and grotesquely misinterpret his actions. He must be always on his guard and devote every minute and module of life to the decoding of the undulation of things. The very air he exhales is indexed and filed away. If only the interest he provokes were limited to his immediate surroundings—but alas it is not! With distance the torrents of wild scandal increase in yolume and volubility. The silhouettes of his blood corpuscles, magnified a million times, flit over vast plains; and still far- ther, great mountains of unbearable solidity and height sum up in ‘terms of granite and groaning firs the ultimate truth of his being.
When they emerged from the thunder and foul air of the subway, the jast dregs of the day were mixed with the streetlights, She wanted to buy some fish for supper, so she handed him the basket of jelly jars, telling him to go home. He walked up to the third landing and then remembered he had given her his keys earlier in the day. In silence he sat down on the steps and in silence rose when some ten minutes later she came, heavily trudging upstairs, wanly smiling, shaking her head in deprecation of her silliness. They entered their two-room flat and he at once went to the mirror. Straining the corners of his mouth apart by means of his thumbs, with a horrible masklike grimace, he removed his new hopelessly uncomfortable dental plate and severed the long tusks of saliva connecting him to it. He read his Russian-language newspaper while she laid the table. Still reading, he ate the pale victuals that needed no teeth. She knew his moods and was also silent.
When he had gone to bed, she remained in the iiving room with her pack of soiled cards and her old albums. Across the narrow yard where the rain tinkled in the dark against some battered ash cans, win- dows were blandly alight and in one of them a black-trousered man with his bare elbows raised could be seen lying supine on an untidy bed. She pulled the blind down and examined the photographs. As a baby he looked more surprised than most babies. From a fold in the al- bum, a German maid they had had in Leipzig and her fat-faced fiancé fell out. Minsk, the Revolution, Leipzig, Berlin, Leipzig, a slanting housefront badly out of focus. Four years old, in a park: moodily, shyly, with puckered forehead, looking away from an eager squirrel! as
he would from any other stranger. Aunt Rosa, a fussy. i : . At eyed 4 angular, wildruptcies, old lady, who had lived in a tremulous world of bad news, bank- train accidents, cancerous growths—until the Germans put
pity,
was the with humiliating difficulties, the ugly, vicious, backward children he in thar special school. And then came a time in his life, coinof a leafless tree. Aged ten: the year they left Europe, The shame, the
tangle
tricities of a prodigiously gifted child hardened as it were into a dense of logically interacting illusions, making him totally inaccessible
This, and much more, she accepted—for after all living did mean accepting the loss of one joy after another, not even joys in her case— mere possibilities of improvement. She thought of the endless waves
dure;
of pain that for some reason or other she and her husband had to en- of the invisible giants hurting her boy in ‘some unimaginable
world;
fashion; of the incalculable amount of tenderness contained in the
wasted, of the fate of this tenderness, which is cither crushed, or or transformed into madness; of neglected children humming
from
to themselves in unswept corners; of beautiful weeds that cannot hide the farmer and helplessly have to watch the shadow of his simian stoop leave mangled flowers in its wake, as -the monstrous darkness
It was past midnight when from the living room she heard her hus- band moan; and presently he staggered in, wearing over his nightgown the nice old overcoat with astrakhan collar which he much preferred to the blue bathrobe he had. . “I cdn’t sleep,” he cried.
“Why,” ‚she asked, “why can’t you sleep? You were so tired.”
“J can’t sleep because I am dying,” he said and lay down on the couch.
“Is it your stomach? Do you want me to call Dr. Solov?”
“No doctors, no doctors,” he moaned. “To the devil with doc- tors! We must get him out of there quick. Otherwise we'll be responsible. Responsible!” he repeated and hurled himself into a sitting
position, both feet on the floor, thumping his forehead with his clenched fist. .
“All right,” she said quietly, “we shall bring him home tomorrow
morning.”
“I would like some tea,” said her husband, and retired to the bathroom. ‚
Bending with difficulty, she retrieved some playing cards and a photograph or two that had slipped from the couch to the floor: knave of
hearts, nine of spades, ace of spades, Elsa and her bestial beau.
He returned in high spirits, saying in a loud voice: “I have it all figured out. We will give him the bedroom. Each of us will spend part of
the night near him and the other part on this couch. By turns. We will
have the doctor see him at least twice a week. It does not matter what
the Prince says. He won’t have to say much anyway because it will
come out cheaper.” . " N
The telephone rang. It was an unusual hour for their telephone w
ring. His left slipper’had come off and he groped for it with his heel
and toe as he stood in the middle of the room, and childishly, toothlessly, gaped at his wife. Having more English than he did, it was she
who attended to cails.
“Can I speak to Charlie,” said a girl’s dull little voice.
“What number you want? No. That is not the ight number.”
The receiver was gently cradled. Her hand went to her old tired
heart.
“It frightened me,” she said.
He smiled a quick smile and immediately resumed his excited monologue. They would fetch him as soon as it was day. Knives would have .
to be kept in a locked drawer. Even at his worst he presented no danger to other people.
The telephone rang a second time. The same toneless anxious
young voice asked for Charlie. ; “You have the incorrect number. I will tell you what you are doing:
you are turning the letter O instead of the zero.”
They sat down to their unexpected festive midnight tea. The birth- day present stood on the table. He sipped noisily; his face was flushed;

every now and then he imparted a circular motion to his raised glass so as to make the sugar dissolve more thoroughly. The vein on the side of his bald head where there was a large birthmark stood out conspic- uously and, although he had shaved that morning, a silvery bristle showed, on his chin. While she poured him another glass of tea, he put on his spectacles and reexamined with pleasure the luminous yellow, green, red little jars. His clumsy moist lips spelled out their eloquent labels: apricot, grape, beech plum, quince. He had got to crab apple, when the telephone rang again. 