One of my representatives—a modest, mild bachelor, very
efficient—happened to win a pleasure trip at a charity ball
nf given by Russian refugees. That was in 1936 or 1937. The
Berlin summer was in full flood (it was the second weck of damp and
cold, so that it was a pity to look at everything which had turned green
in vain, and only the sparrows kept cheerful); he did not care to go
anywhere, but when he tried to sell his ticket at the office of the Bureau of Pleasantrips he was told that to do so he would have to have
special permission from the Ministry of Transportation; when he tried
them, it turned out that first he would have to draw up a complicated
petition at a notary’s on stamped paper; and besides, a so-called “certificate of nonabsence from the city for the summertime” had to be
obtained from the police.
So he sighed a little, and decided to go. He borrowed ’an aluminum
flask from friends, repaired his soles, bought a belt and a fancy-style
flannel shirt—one of those cowardly things which shrink in the first
wash. Incidentally, it was too large for that likable little man, his hair
always neatly trimmed, his eyes so intelligent and kind. I cannot remember his name at the moment. I think it was Vasiliy Ivanovich.
He slept badly the night before the departure. And why? Because
he had to get up.unusually early, and hence took along into his dreams
the delicate face of the watch ticking on his night table; but mainly because that very night, for no reason at all, he began to imagine that
this tip, thrust upon him by a feminine fate in a low-cut gown, this
trip which he had accepted so reluctantly, would bring him some wonderful, tremulous happiness. This happiness would have something in
common with his childhood, and with the excitement aroused in him
by Russian lyrical poetry, and with some evening, skyline once seen in
 a dream, and with that lady, another man’s wife, whom he had hope- \
lessly loved for seven years—but it would be even fuller and more significant than all that. And besides, he felt that the really good life must
be oriented toward something or someone.
The moming was dull, but steam-warm and close, with an inner
sun, and it was quite pleasant to rattle in a streetcar to the distant railway station where the gathering place was: several people, alas, were
taking part in the excursion. Who would they be, these drowsy beings, drowsy as seem ali creatures still unknown to us? By Window
Number 6, at seven a.m., as was indicated in the directions appended
to the ticket, he saw them {they were already waiting; he had managed
to be late by about three minutes).
A lanky blond young man in Tyrolese garb stood out at once. He
was burned the color of a cockscomb, had huge brick-red knees with
golden hairs, and his nose looked !acquered. He was the leader furnished by the Bureau, and as soon as the newcomer had joined the
group (which consisted of four women and as many men) he led it off
toward a train lurking behind other trains, carrying his monstrous . knapsack with terrifying ease, and firmly clanking with his hobnailed
boots.
Everyone found a place in an empty car, unmistakably third-class,
and Vasiliy Ivanovich, having sat down by himself and put a peppermint into his mouth, opened a litde volume of Tyutchev, whom he had
long intended to reread; but he was requested to put the book aside
and join the group. An elderly bespectacled post-office clerk, with skull,
chin, and upper lip a bristly blue as if he had shaved off some extraordinarily luxuriant and tough growth especially for this trip, immediately
announced that he had been to Russia and knew some Russian—for instance, patzlui—and, recalling philanderings in Tsaritsyn, winked in
such a manner that his fat wife sketched out in the air the outline of a
backhand box on the ear. The company was getting noisy. Four employees of the same building firm were tossing each other heavy-weight
jokes: a middle-aged man, Schultz; a younger man, Schultz also, and
two fidgety young women with big mouths and big rumps. The .redheaded, rather burlesque widow in a sport skirt knew something too
about Russia (the Riga beaches). There was also a dark young man by:
the name of Schramm, with fusterless eyes and a vague velvety vileness
about his person and manners, who constantly switched the conversation to this or that attractive aspect of the excursion, and who gave the
first signal for rapturous appreciation; he was, as it tamed out later, a
special stimulator fom the Bureau of Pleasantrips.
The locomotive, working rapidly with its elbows, hurried ‘arouse
a pine forest, then—with relief—among fields. Only dimly realizing as
yet all the absurdity and horror of the situation, and perhaps attempting to persuade himself that everything was very nice, Vasiliy Ivanovich contrived to enjoy the fleeting gifts of the réad. And indeed, how enticing it all is, what charm the world acquires when it is wound ©
up and moving like a merry-go-round! The sun crept toward a corner of the window and suddenly spilled over the yellow bench. The badly pressed shadow of the car sped madly along the grassy bank, where flowers blended into colored streaks. A crossing: a cyclist was waiting,
one foot resting on the ground. Trees appeared in groups and singly, revolving coolly and blandly, displaying the latest fashions. The blue
dampness of a ravine. A memory of love, disguised as a meadow. Wispy clouds—greyhounds of heaven.
_ We both, Vasiliy Ivanovich and I, have always been impressed by the anonymity of all the parts of a landscape, so dangerous for the
soul, the impossibility of ever finding out where that path you see
leads—and look, what a tempting thicket! It happened that on a distant slope or in a gap in the trees there would appear and, as it were,
stop for an instant, like air retained in the lungs, a spot so enchanting—a lawn, a terrace—such perfect expression of tender well-meaning
beauty—that it seemed that if one could stop the train and go thither,
forever, to you, my love . . . But a thousand beech trunks were already,
madly leaping by, whirling i in a sizzling sun pool, and again the chance
for happiness was gone.
At the stations, Vasiliy Ivanovich would look at the configuration of
some entirely insignificant objects—a smear on the platform, a cherry
stone, a cigarette butt—and would say to himself that never, never
would he remember these three little things here in that particular interrelation, this pattern, which he now could see with such deathless
precision; or again, looking at a group of children waiting for a train,
he would try with all his might to single out at least one remarkable
destiny—in the form of a violin or a crown, a propeller or a lyre—and
would gaze until the whole party of village schoolboys appeared as in
an old photograph, now reproduced with a little white cross above the
face of the last boy on the right: the hero’s childhood.
But one could look out of the window only by snatches. All had
been given sheet music with verses from the Bureau:
Stop that worrying and moping,
Take a knotted stick and rise,
Come a-tramping in the open
With the good, the hearty guys!
Tramp your country’s grass and stubble,
With the good, the heariy guys,
KGL! the hermit and bis trouble
And to hell with doubts and sighs!
In a paradisé of heather
Where the field mouse screams and dies,
Let us march and sweat together
With the steel-ana-leather guys!
- This was to be sung in chorus: Vasilty Ivanovich, who not only
could not sing but could not even pronounce German words clearly,
took advantage of the drowning roar of mingling voices and merely
’ opened his mouth while swaying slightly, as if he were really singing—
but the leader, at a sign from the subtle Schramm, suddenly stopped
the: general singing and, squinting askance at Vasiliy Ivanovich, demanded that he sing solo. Vasiliy Ivanovich cleared his throat, timidly
began, and after a minute of solitary torment ail joined in; but he did
not dare thereafter to drop out.
He had with him his favorite cucumber from the Russian store, a
loaf of bread, and three eggs. When evening came, and the low cnmson sun entered wholly the soiled seasick car, stunned by its own din,
all were invited to hand over their provisions, in order to divide them
evenly—this was particularly easy, as all except Vasiliy Ivanovich had
the same things. The cucumber amused everybody, was pronounced
inedible, and was thrown out of the window. In view of the insufBciency of his contribution, Vasiliy Ivanovich got a smaller portion of
sausage.
He was made to play cards. They pulled him about, questioned
him, verified whether he could show the route of the trip on a
map—in a word, all busied themselves with him, at first goodnaturedly, then with malevolence, which ‘grew with the approach of
night. Both girls were called Greta; the red-headed widow somehow
resembled the rooster-leader; Schramm, Schultz, and the other
Schultz, the post-office clerk and his wife, all gradually melted together, merged together, forming one collective, wobbly, manyhanded being, frém which one could not escape. It pressed upon him
from alt sides. But suddenly at some station all climbed out, and it was
already dark, although in the west there still hung a very long, very
pink cloud, and farther along the track, with a soul-piercing light, the
star of a lamp trembled. through the slow smoke. of the engine, and
crickets chirped in the dark, and from somewhere there came the odor
. of jasmine and hay, my love.
They spent the night in a tumble-down inn. A mature bedbug is
awful, but there is a certain grace in the motions of silky silverfish. The
post-office clerk was separated from his wife, who was put with the
widow; he was given to Vasiliy Ivanovich for the night. The two beds
took up the whole room. Quilt on top, chaniber pot below. The clerk
said that somehow he did not feel sleepy, and began to talk of his Russian adventures, rather more circumstantially than in the train. He was
a great bully of a man, thorough and obstinate, clad in long cotton
drawers, with mother-of-peari claws on his dirty toes, and bear’s fur
between fat breasts. A moth dashed about the ceiling, hobnobbing
with its shadow. “In Tsaritsyn,” the clerk was saying, “there are now
three schools, a German, a Czech, and a Chinese one, At any rate, that
is what my brother-in-law says; he went there to build tractors.”
Next day, from early morning to five o’clock in the afternoon, they
raised dust along a highway, which undulated from hill to hill, then
they took a green road through a dense fir wood. Vasiliy Ivanovich, as
the least burdened, was given an enormous round loaf of bread to
carry under his arm. How I hate you, our daily! But still his precious,
experienced eyes noted what was necessary. Against the background of
fir-tree gloom a dry needle was hanging vertically on an invisible
thread.
Again they piled into a train, and again the small partitionless car
was empty. The other Schultz began. to teach Vasiliy Ivanovich how to
play the mandolin. There was much laughter. When they got tired of
that, they thought up a capital game, which was supervised by
Schramm. It consisted of the following: the women would lie down on
the benches they chose, under which the men were already hidden,
and when from under one of the benches there would emerge a ruddy
face with ears, or a big outspread hand, with a skirt-lifting curve of the
fingers (which would provoke much squealing), then it would be revealed who was paired off with whom. Three times Vasiliy Ivanovich
lay down in filthy darkness, and three times it turned out that there
was no one on the bench when he crawled out from under. He was acknowledged the loser and was forced to eat a cigarette butt.
They spent the night on straw mattresses in a barn, and early in the
morning set out again on foot. Firs, ravines, foamy streams. From
the heat, from the songs which one had constantly to bawl, Vasiliy
Ivanovich became so exhausted that during the midday halt he fell
asleep at once, and awoke only when they began to slap at imaginary
horseflies on him. But after another hour of marching, that very happiness of which hé had once half dreamt was suddenly discovered.
It was a pure, blue lake, with an unusual expression of its water. In ~
the middle, a large cloud was reflected in its entirety. On the other
side, on a hill thickly covered with verdure (and the darker the verdure, the more poetic it is), towered, arising from dactyl to dactyl, an
ancient black castle. Of course, there are plenty of such views in Central Europe, but just this one—in the inexpressible and unique harmoniousness of its three principal parts, in its smile, in some mysterious
innocence it had, my love! my obedient one!—was something so
unique, and so familiar, and so long-promised, and it so understood the
beholder that Vasiliy Ivanovich even pressed his hand to his heart, as
if to see whether his heart was there in order to give it away.
At some distance, Schramm, poking into the air with the leader’s
alpenstock, was calling the attention of the excursionists to something
or other; they had settled themselves around on the grass in poses seen
in amateur snapshots, while the leader sat on a stump, his behind to
the lake, and was having a snack. Quietly, concealing himself in his
own shadow, Vasiliy Ivanovich followed the shore, and came to a kind
of inn. A dog still quite young greeted him; it crept on its belly, its
jaws laughing, its tail fervently beating the ground. Vasiliy Ivanovich
accompanied the dog into the house, a piebald two-storied dwelling
with a winking window beneath a convex tiled eyelid; and he found
the owner, a tall old man vaguely resembling a Russian war veteran,
who spoke German so poorly and with such a soft draw! that Vasiliy
Ivanovich changed to his own tongue, but the man understood as in
a dream and continued in the language of his environment, his family.
Upstairs was a room for travelers. “You know, I shall take it for the
rest of my life,” Vasiliy Ivanovich is reported to have said as soon as he
had entered it. The room itself had nothing remarkable about it. On
the contrary, it was a most ordinary room, with a red floor, daisies
daubed on the white walls, and a small mirror half filled with the yellow infusion of the reflected flowers—but from the window one could
clearly see the lake with its cloud and its castle, in a motionless and
perfect correlation of happiness. Without reasoning, without considering, only entirely surrendering to an attraction the truth of which consisted in its own strength, a strength which he had never experienced
before, Vasiliy Ivanovich’ in one radiant second realized that here in
this little room with that view, beautiful to the verge of tears, life
would at last be what he had always wished it to be. What exactly it
would be like, what would take place here, that of course he did not
know, but all around him were help, promise, and consolation—so
that there could not be any doubt that he must live here. In a moment
he figured out how be would manage it so as not to have to return to
Berlin again, how to get the few possessions that he had—books, the
blue suit, her photograph. How simple it was turning out! As my representative, he was earning enough for the modest life of a refugee Russian. , “
“My friends,” he cried, having run down again to the meadow by
the shore, “my fiends, good-bye. I shall remain for good in that
house over there. We can’t travel together any longer. I shall go no farther. I am not going anywhere. Good-bye!”
“How is that?” said the leader in a queer voice, after a short pause,
during which the smile on the lips of Vasiliy Ivanovich slowly faded,
while the people who had been sitting on the grass half rose and stared
at him with stony eyes.
“But why?” he faltered. “It is here that .
“Silence!” the post-office clerk suddenly bellowed ‘with extraordinary force. “Come to your senses, you drunken swine!”
“Wait a moment, gentlemen,” said the leader, and, having passed
his tongue over his lips, he turned to Vasiliy Ivanovich.
“You probably have-been drinking,” he said quietly. “Or have gone
out of your mind. You are taking a pleasure tip with us. Tomorrow,
according to the appointed itinerary—look at your ticket—we are all
returning to Berlin. There can be no question of anyone—in this case
you—tefusing to continue this communal journey. We were singing
today a certain song—try and remember what it said. That’s enough
now! Come, children, we are going on.”
“There will be beer at Ewald,” said Schramm in a caressing voice,
“Five hours by train. Hikes. A hunting lodge. Coal mines. Lots of interesting things.” ,
“I shall complain,” wailed Vasiliy Ivanovich. “Give me back my
bag. I have the right to remain where I want. Oh, but this is nothing
- Jess than an invitation to a beheading”—he told me he cried when they
seized him by the arms.
“If necessary we shall carry you,” said the leader grimly, “but that
‘is not likely to be pleasant. I am responsible for each of you, and shall
bring back each of-you, alive or dead.”
Swept along a forest road ‘as in a hideous fairy tale, squeezed,
twisted, Vasiliy Ivanovich could not even turn around, and only felt
how the radiance behind his back receded, fractured by trees, and then
it was no longer there, and all around the dark firs fretted but could
not interfere. As soon as everyone had got into the car and the train
had pulled off, they began to beat him—they beat him a long time,
and with a good deal of inventiveness. It occurred to them, among
other things, to use a corkscrew on his palms; then on his feet. The
post-office clerk, who had been to Russia, fashioned a knout out of a
stick and a belt, and began to use it with devilish dexterity. Arta boy!
The other men relied more on their iron heels, whereas the women
were satisfied to pinch and slap. All had a wonderful time.
After returning to Berlin, he called on me, was much changed, Sat
down quietly, putting his hands on his knees, told his story; kept on
repeating that he must resign his position, begged me to let him go,
insisted that he could not continue, that he had not the strength to beJong to mankind any longer. Of course, I let him go. 