Several  years  ago  a  friend  of  mine  in  Paris—a  person  with  oddities,  to  put  it  mildly—learning that I was going to spend two or three days at Montisert, asked me to drop in at the local museum where there hung, he  was told, a portrait of his  grandfather by  Leroy. Smiling and spreading out his hands, he related a rather vague story to which I confess I paid  little  attention,  partly  because  I  do  not  like  other  people's  obtrusive  affairs,  but chiefly because I had always had doubts about my friend's capacity to remain this side of fantasy. It went more or less as follows: after the grandfather died in their St. Petersburg house back at the time of the Russo-Japanese War, the contents of his apartment in Paris were sold at auction. The portrait, after some obscure peregrinations, was acquired by the museum  of  Leroy's  native  town.  My  friend  wished  to  know  if  the  portrait  was  really there; if there, if it could be ransomed; and if it could, for what price. When I asked why he did not get in touch with the museum, he replied that he had written several times, but had never received an answer.I made an inward resolution not to carry out the request—I could always tell him I had fallen ill or changed my itinerary. The very notion of seeing sights, whether they be museums or ancient buildings, is loathsome to me; besides, the good freak's commission seemed  absolute  nonsense.  It  so  happened,  however,  that,  while  wandering  about Montisert's empty streets in search of  a stationery store, and  cursing the spire of  a long-necked cathedral, always the same one, that kept popping up at the end of every street, I was caught in a violent downpour which immediately went about accelerating the fall of the  maple  leaves,  for  the  fair  weather  of  a  southern  October  was  holding  on  by  a  mere thread. I dashed for cover and found myself on the steps of the museum.It was a building of modest proportions, constructed of many colored stones, with columns,  a  gilt  inscription  over  the  frescoes  of  thepediment,  and  a  lion-legged  stone bench  on  either  side  of  the  bronze  door.  One  of  its  leaves  stood  open,  and  the  interior seemed  dark  against  the  shimmer  of  the  shower.  I  stood  for  a  while  on  the  steps,  but, despite the overhanging roof, they were gradually growing speck led. I saw that the rain had set in for good, and so, having nothing better to do, I decided to go inside. No sooner had I trod on the smooth, resonant flagstones of the vestibule than the clatter of a moved stool  came  from  a  distant  corner,  and  the  custodian—a  banal  pensioner  with  an  empty sleeve—rose  to  meet  me,  laying  aside  his  newspaper  and  peering  at  me  over  his spectacles. I paid my franc and, trying not to look at some statues at the entrance (which were as traditional and as insignificant as the first number in a circus program), I entered the main hall.Everything  was  as  it  should  be:  gray  tints,  the  sleep  of  substance,  matter dematerialized. There was the usual case of old, worn coins resting in the inclined velvet of  their  compartments.  There  was,  on  top  of  the  case,  a  pair  of  owls,  Eagle  Owl  and Long-eared,  with  their  French  names  reading  "Grand  Duke"  and  "Middle  Duke"  if translated.  Venerable  minerals  lay  in  their  open  graves  of  dusty  papier  mache;  a photograph of an astonished gentleman with a pointed beard dominated an assortment of strange black lumps of various sizes. They bore a great resemblance to frozen frass, and I paused  involuntarily   over  them,  for   I  was  quite  at  a  loss  to   guess  their  nature, composition,  and  function.The  custodian  had  been  following  me  with  felted  steps, 
2always  keeping  a  respectful  distance;  now,  however,  he  came  up,  with  one  hand  behind his  back  and  the  ghost  of  the  other  in  his  pocket,  and  gulping,  if  one  judged  by  his Adam's apple."What are they?" I asked."Science  has  not  yet  determined,"  he  replied,  undoubtedly  having  learned  the phrase  by  rote.  "They  were  found,"  he  continued  in  the  same  phony  tone,  "in  1895,  by Louis  Pradier,  Municipal  Councillor  and  Knight  of  the  Legion  of  Honor,"  and  his trembling finger indicated the photograph."Well and good," I said, "but who decided, and why, that they merited a place in the museum?""And  now  I  call  your  attention  to  this  skull!"  the  old  man  cried  energetically, obviously changing the subject."Still, I would be interested to know what they are made of," I interrupted."Science..."  he  began  anew,  but  stopped  short  and  looked  crossly  at  his  fingers, which were soiled with dust from the glass.I proceeded to examine a Chinese vase, probably brought back by a naval officer; a  group  of  porous  fossils;  a  pale  worm  in  clouded  alcohol;  a  red-and-green  map  of Montisert  in  the  seventeenth  century;  and  a  trio  of  rusted  tools  bound  by  a  funereal ribbon—a spade, a mattock, and a pick. To dig in the past, I thought absentmindedly, but this time did not seek clarification from the custodian, who was following me noiselessly and meekly, weaving in and out among the display cases. Beyond the first hall there was another,  apparently  the  last,  and  in  its  center  a  largesarcophagus  stood  like  a  dirty bathtub, while the walls were hung with paintings.At  once  my  eye  was  caught  by  the  portrait  of  a  man  between  two  abominable landscapes  (with  cattle  and  "atmosphere").  I  moved  closer  and,  to  my  considerable amazement,  foundthe  very  object  whose  existence  had  hitherto  seemed  to  me  but  the figment  of  an  unstable  mind.  The  man,  depicted  in  wretched  oils,  wore  a  frock  coat, whiskers, and a large pince-nez on a cord; he bore a likeness to Offenbach, but, in spite of the  work's  vile  conventionality,  I  had  the  feeling  one  could  make  out  in  his  features  the horizon of a resemblance, as it were, to my friend. In one corner, meticulously traced in carmine against a black background, was the signature Leroy in a hand as commonplace as the work itself.I  felt  a  vinegarish  breath  near  my  shoulder,  and  turned  to  meet  the  custodian's kindly  gaze.  "Tell  me,"  I  asked,  "supposing  someone  wished  to  buy  one  of  these paintings, whom should he see?""The treasures of the museum are the pride of the city," replied the old man, "and pride is not for sale."Fearing his eloquence, I hastily concurred, but nevertheless asked lor the name of the  museum's  director.  He  tried  to  distract  me  with  the  story  of  the  sarcophagus,  but  I insisted. Finally he gave me the name of one M. Godard and explained where I could find him.Frankly, I enjoyed the thought that the portrait existed. It is fun to be present at the coming true of a dream, even if it is not one's own. I decided to settle the matter without delay. When I get in the spirit, no one can hold me back. I left the museum with a brisk, resonant  step,  and  found  that  the  rain  had  stopped,  lueness  had  spread  across  the  sky,  a woman in besplattered stockings was spinning along on a silver-shining bicycle, and only 
3over  the  surrounding  hills  did  clouds  still  hang.  Once  again  the  cathedral  began  playing hide-and-seek with me, but I outwitted it. Barely escaping the onrushing tires of a furious red bus packed with singing youths, I crossed the asphalt thoroughfare and a minute later was  ringing  at  the  garden  gate  of  M.  Godard.  He-turned  out  to  be  a  thin,  middle-aged gentleman  in  high  collar  and  dickey,  with  a  pearl  in  the  knot  of  his  tie,  and  a  face  very much  resem  bling  a  Russian  wolfhound;  as  if  that  were  not enough,  he  was  licking  his chops in a most doglike manner, while sticking a stamp on an en velope, when I entered his  small  but  lavishly  furnished  room  with  its  malachite  inkstand  on  the  desk  and  a strangely familiar Chinese vase on the mantel. A pair of fencing foils hung crossed over the mirror, which reflected the narrow gray back of his head. Here and there photo graphs of a warship pleasantly broke up the blue flora of the wallpaper."What can I do for you?" he asked, throwing the letter he had just sealed into the wastebasket.  This  act  seemed  unusual  to  me;  how  ever,  I  did  not  see  fit  to  interfere.  I explained in brief my reason for coming, even naming the substantial sum with which my friend was willing to part, though he had asked me not to mention it, but wait in stead for the museum's terms."All  this  is  delightful,"  said  M.  Godard.  "The  only  thing  is,  you  arc-mistaken—there is no such picture in our museum.""What  do  you  mean  there  is  no  such  picture?  I  have  just  seen  it!  Portrait  of  a Russian Nobleman by Gustave Leroy.""We do have one Leroy," said M. Godard when he had leafed through an oilcloth notebook and his black fingernail had stopped at the entry in question. "However, it is not a portrait but a rural land scape: The Return of the Herd.'"I  repeated  that  I  had  seen  the  picture  with  my  own  eyes  five  minutes  before  and that no power on earth could make me doubt its existence."Agreed," said M. Godard, "but  I am not crazy  either.  I have been curator of our museum  for  almost  twenty  years  now  and  know  this  catalogue  as  well  as  I  know  the Lord's Prayer.  It says here Return of the Herd and that means the herd is returning, and, unless  perhaps  your  friend's  grandfather  is  depicted  as  a  shepherd,  I  cannot  conceive  of his portrait's existence in our museum.""He is wearing a frock coat," I cried. "I swear he is wearing a frock coat!""And  how  did  you  like  our  museum  in  general?"  M.  Godard  asked  suspiciously. "Did you appreciate the sarcophagus?""Listen,"  I  said  (and  I  think  there  was  already  atremor  in  my  voice),  "do  me  a favor—let's go there this minute, and let's make an agreement that if the portrait is there, you will sell it.""And if not?" inquired M. Godard."I shall pay you the sum anyway.""All  right,"  he  said.  "Here,  take  this  red-and-blue  pencil  and  using  the  red—the red, please—put it in writing for me."In  my  excitement  I  carried  out  his  demand.  Upon  glancing  at  my  signature,  he deplored  the  difficult  pronunciation  of  Russian  names.  Then  he  appended  his  own signature and, quickly folding the sheet, thrust it into his waistcoat pocket."Let's go," he said, freeing a cuff.On  the  way  he  stepped  into  a  shop  and  bought  a  bag  of  sticky-looking  caramels which  he  began  offering  me  insistently;  when  I  flatly  refused,  he  tried  to  shakeout  a 
4couple  of  them  into  my  hand.  I  pulled  my  hand  away.  Several  caramels  fell  on  the sidewalk; he stopped to pick them up and then overtook me at a trot. When we drew near the museum we saw the red tourist bus (now empty) parked outside."Aha," said M.Godard, pleased. "I see we have many visitors today."He doffed his hat and, holding it in front of him, walked decorously up the steps.All  was  not  well  at  the  museum.  From  within  issued  rowdy  cries,  lewd  laughter, and  even  what  seemed  like  the  sound  of  a  scuffle.  We  entered  the  first  hall;  there  the elderly  custodian  was  restraining  two  sacrilegists  who  wore  some  kind  of  festive emblems in their lapels and were altogether very purple-faced and full of pep as they tried to extract the municipal councillor's merds from beneath the glass. The rest of the youths, members of some rural athletic organization, were making noisy fun, some of the worm in  alcohol,  others  of  the  skull.  One  joker  was  in  rapture  over  the  pipes  of  the  steam radiator,  which  he  pretended  was  an  exhibit;  another  was  taking  aim  at  an  owl  with  his fist  and  forefinger.  There  were  about  thirty  of  them  in  all,  and  their  motion  and  voices created a condition of crush and thick noise.M. Godard clapped his hands and pointed at a sign reading "VISITORS TO THE MUSEUM  MUST  BE  DECENTLY  ATTIRED."  Then  he  pushed  his  way,  with  me following,  into  the  second  hall.  The  whole  company  immediately  swarmed  after  us.  I steered Godard to the portrait; he froze before it, chest inflated, and then stepped back abit, as if admiring it, and his feminine heel trod on somebody's foot."Splendid  picture,"  he  exclaimed  with  genuine  sincerity.  "Well,  let's  not  be  petty about this. You were right, and there must be an error in the catalogue."As  he  spoke,  his  fingers,moving  as  it  were  on  their  own,  tore  up  our  agreement into little bits which fell like snowflakes into a massive spittoon."Who's  the  old  ape?"  asked  an  individual  in  a  striped  jersey,  and,  as  my  friend's grandfather was depicted holding a glowing cigar,another funster took out a cigarette and prepared to borrow a light from the portrait."All right, let us settle on the price," I said, "and, in any case, let's get out of here.""Make way, please!" shouted M. Godard, pushing aside the curious.There was an exit, which  I had not noticed previously,  at the end of the  hall and we thrust our way through to it."I  can make no decision," M. Godard was shouting  above the din.  "Decisiveness is  a  good  thing  only  when  supported  by  law.  I  must  first  discuss  the matter  with  the mayor,  who  has  just  died  and  has  not  yet  been  elected.  I  doubt  that  you  will  be  able  to purchase  the  portrait  but  nonetheless  I  would  like  to  show  you  still  other  treasures  of ours."We  found  ourselves  in  a  hall  of  considerable  dimensions.Brown  books,  with  a half-baked look and coarse, foxed pages, lay open under glass on a long table. Along the walls stood dummy soldiers in jack boots with flared tops."Come, let's talk it over," I cried out in desperation, trying to di rect M. Godard's evolutions  to  a  plush-covered  sofa  in  a  corner.  But  in  this  I  was  prevented  by  the custodian.  Flailing  his  one  arm,  he  came  running  after  us,  pursued  by  a  merry  crowd  of youths, one of whom had put on his head a copper helmet with a Rembrandtesque gleam. "Take  it  off,  take  it  off!"  shouted  M.  Godard,  and  someone's  shove  made  the  helmet  fly off the hooligan's head with a clatter."Let us move on," said M. Godard, tugging at my sleeve, and we passed into the 
5section of Ancient Sculpture.I  lost  my  way  for  amoment  among  some  enormous  marble  legs,  and  twice  ran around  a  giant  knee  before  I  again  caught  sight  of  M.  Godard,  who  was  looking  for  me behind  the  white  ankle  of  a  neighboring  giantess.  Here  a  person  in  a  bowler,  who  must have  clambered  up  her,  suddenly  fell  from  a  great  height  to  the  stone  floor.  One  of  his companions began helping him up, but they were both drunk, and, dismissing them with a wave  of  the  hand,  M.  Godard  rushed  on  to  the  next  room,  radiant  with  Oriental  fabrics; there hounds raced across azure carpets, and a bow and quiver lay on a tiger skin.Strangely,   though,   the   expanse   and   motley   only   gave   me   a   feeling   of oppressiveness  and  imprecision,  and,  perhaps  because  new  visitors  kept  dashing  by  or perhaps because  I was impatient to leave the unnecessarily spreading museum and amid calm  and  freedom  conclude  my  business  negotiations  with  M.  Godard,  I  began  to experience  a  vague  sense  of  alarm.  Meanwhile  we  had  transported  ourselves  into  yet another hall, which must have been really enormous, judging by the fact that it housed the entire  skeleton  of  a  whale,  resembling  a  frigate's  frame;  beyond  were  visible  still  other halls, with the oblique sheen of large paintings, full of storm clouds, among which floated the delicate idols of religious art in blue and pink vestments; and all this resolved itself in an  abrupt  turbulence  of  misty  draperies,  and  chandeliers  came  aglitter  and  fish  with translucent  frills  meandered  through  illuminated  aquariums.  Racing  up  a  staircase,  we saw, from the  gallery  above, a  crowd of  gray-haired people with umbrellas examining  a gigantic mock-up of the universe.At  last,  in  a  somber  but  magnificent  room  dedicated  to  the  history  of  steam machines, I managed to halt my carefree guide for an instant."Enough!" I shouted. "I'm leaving. We'll talk tomorrow."He  had  already  vanished.  I  turned  and  saw,  scarcely  an  inch  from  me,  the  lofty wheels  of  a  sweaty  locomotive.  For  a  long  time  I  tried  to  find  the  way  back  among models of railroad stations. How strangely glowed the violet signals in the gloom beyond the  fan  of  wet  tracks,  and  what  spasms  shook  my  poor  heart!  Suddenly  everything changed  again:  in  front  of  me  stretched  an  infinitely  long  passage,  containing  numerous office cabinets and elusive, scurrying people. Taking a sharp turn, I found myself amid a thousand musical instruments; the walls, all mirror, reflected an enfilade of grand pianos, while in the center there was a pool with a bronze Orpheus atop a green rock. The aquatic theme  did  not  end  here  as,  racing  back,  Iended  up  in  the  Section  of  Fountains  and Brooks, and it was difficult to walk along the winding, slimy edges of those waters.Now  and  then,  on  one  side  or  the  other,  stone  stairs,  with  puddles  on  the  steps, which  gave  me  a  strange  sensation  of  fear,  would  descend  into  misty  abysses,  whence issued  whistles,  the  rattle  of  dishes,  the  clatter  of  typewriters,  the  ring  of  hammers,  and many other sounds, as if, down there, were exposition halls of some kind or other, already closing  or  not  yet  completed.  Then  Ifound  myself  in  darkness  and  kept  bumping  into unknown  furniture  until  I  finally  saw  a  red  light  and  walked  out  onto  a  platform  that clanged  under  me—and  suddenly,  beyond  it,  there  was  a  bright  parlor,  tastefully furnished  in  Empire  style,  but  not  a  living  soul,  not  a  living  soul....  By  now  I  was indescribably  terrified,  but  every  time  I  turned  and  tried  to  retrace  my  steps  along  the passages,  I  found  myself  in  hitherto  unseen  places—a  greenhouse  with  hydrangeas  and broken  windowpanes  with  the  darkness  of artificial  night  showing  through  beyond;  or  a deserted  laboratory  with  dusty  alembics  on  its  tables.  Finally  I  ran  into  a  room  of  some 
6sort with coatracks monstrously loaded down with black coats and astra khan furs; from beyond  a  door  came  a  burst  of  applause,  but  when  I  flung  the  door  open,  there  was  no theater,  but  only  a  soft  opacity  and  splendidly  counterfeited  fog  with  the  perfectly convincing  blotches  of  indistinct  streetlights.  More  than  convincing!  I  advanced,  and immediately a joyous and unmistakable sensation of reality at last replaced all the unreal trash amid which I had just been dashing to and fro. The stone beneath my feet was real sidewalk,   powdered   with   wonderfully   fragrant,   newly   fallen   snow,   in   which   the infrequent pedestrians had al ready left fresh black tracks. At first the quiet and the snowy coolness  of  the  night,  somehow  strikingly  familiar,  gave  me  a  pleasant  feeling  after  my feverish  wanderings.  Trustfully,  I  started  to  conjecture  just  where  I  had  come  out,  and why  the  snow,  and  what  were  those  lights  exaggeratedly  but  indistinctly  beaming  here and  there  in  the  brown  darkness.  I  examined  and,  stooping,  even  touched  a  round  spur stone  on  the  curb,  then  glanced  at  the  palm  of  my  hand,  full  of  wet  granular  cold,  as  if hoping to read an explanation there. I felt how lightly, how naively I was clothed, but the distinct realization that I had escaped from the museum's maze was still so strong that, for the  first  two  or  three  minutes,  I  experienced  neither  surprise  nor  fear.  Continuing  my leisurely  examination,  I  looked  up  at  the  house  beside  which  I  was  standing  and  was immediately struck by the sight of iron steps and railings that descended into the snow on their way to the  cellar. There was a twinge in my heart,  and it was with a new, alarmed curiosity  that  I  glanced  at  the  pavement,  at  its  white  cover  along  which  stretched  black lines,  at  the  brown  sky  across  which  there  kept  sweeping  a  mysterious  light,  and  at  the massive parapet some distance away. I sensed that there was a drop beyond it; something was creaking and gurgling down there. Further on, beyond the murky cavity, stretched a chain of fuzzy lights. Scuffling along the snow in my soaked shoes, I walked a few paces, all the time glancing  at the dark house on my right; only in a single  window did a lamp glow softly under its green-glass shade. Here, a locked wooden gate.... There, what must be  the  shutters  of  a  sleeping  shop....  And  by  the  light  of  a  streetlamp  whose  shape  had long  been  shouting  to  me  its  impossible  message,  I  made  out  the  ending  of  a  sign—"... INKA SAPOG" ("... OE REPAIR")—but no, it was not the snow that had obliterated the "hard sign" at the end. "No, no, in a minute I shall wake up," I said aloud, and, trembling, my  heart  pounding,  I  turned,  walked  on,  stopped again.  From  somewhere  came  the receding  sound  of  hooves,  the  snow  sat  like  a  skullcap  on  a  slightly  leaning  spur  stone and indistinctly showed white on the woodpile on the other side of the fence, and already I  knew,  irrevocably,  where  I  was.  Alas,  it  was not  the  Russia  I  remembered,  but  the factual  Russia  of  today,  forbidden  to  me,  hopelessly  slavish,  and  hopelessly  my  own native  land.  A  semiphantom  in  a  light  foreign  suit,  I  stood  on  the  impassive  snow  of  an October  night,  somewhere  on  the  Moyka  or  the  Fontanka  Canal,  or  perhaps  on  the Obvodny, and I had to do something, go somewhere, run; desperately protect my fragile, illegal life. Oh, how many times in my sleep I had experienced a similar sensation! Now, though, it was reality. Everything was real—the air that seemed to mingle with scattered snowflakes, the still unfrozen canal, the floating fish house, and that peculiar squareness of the darkened and the yellow windows. A man in a fur cap, with a briefcase under his arm, came toward me out of the fog, gave me a startled glance, and turned to look again when he had passed me. I waited for him to disappear and then, with a tremendous haste, began pulling out everything I had in my pockets, ripping up papers, throwing them into the snow and stamping them down. There were some documents, a letter from my sister 
7in Paris, five hundred francs, a handkerchief, cigarettes; however, in order to shed all the integument of exile, I would have to tear off and destroy my clothes, my linen, my shoes, everything, and remain ideally naked; and, even though I was already shivering from my anguish and from the cold, I did what I could.But  enough.  I  shall  not  recount  how  I  was  arrested,  nor  tell  of  my  subsequent ordeals. Suffice it to say that it cost me incredible patience and effort to get back abroad, and  that,  ever  since,  I  have  forsworn  carrying  out  commissions  entrusted  one  by  the insanity of others.