IN THE BEGINNING WAS THE
word, and maybe not even just one, but what could he know
about that? What he discovered at his point of origin was a stack
of planks on wet grass, smelling of fresh resin and soaking up the
sun with their yellow surfaces: he found nails in a plywood box,
hammers, saws, and so forth—but visualizing all this, he ob-
served that he was thinking the picture into existence rather than
just seeing it. Only later did a weak sense of self emerge, when
the bicycles already stood inside him and three shelves one above
the other covered his right wall. He wasn’t really Number XII
then; he was merely a new configuration of the stack of planks.
But those were the times that had left the most pure and endur-
ing impression. All around lay the wide incomprehensible world,
and it seemed as though he had merely interrupted his journey
through it, making a halt here, at this spot, for a while.

Certainly the spot could have been better—out behind the
low five-storey prefabs, alongside the vegetable gardens and the
garbage dump. But why feel upset about something like that? He
wasn’t going to spend his entire life here, after all. Of course, if
he’d really thought about it, he would have been forced to admit
that that was precisely what he was going to do—that’s the way it


in the absence of such thoughts. He simply stood there in the
sunshine, rejoicing in the wind whistling through his cracks if it
blew from the woods, or falling into a slight depression if it blew
in from over the dump. The depression passed as soon as the
wind changed direction, without leaving any long-term effect on
a soul that was still only partially formed.

One day he was approached by a man naked to the waist in a
pair of red tracksuit pants, holding a brush and a huge can of
paint. The shed was already beginning to recognize this man,
who was different from all the other people because he could get
inside, to the bicycles and the shelves. He stopped by the wall,
dipped the brush into the can, and traced a bright crimson line
on the planks. An hour later the hut was crimson all over. This
was the first real landmark in his memory—everything that came
before it was still cloaked in a sense of distant and unreal happi-
ness.

The night after the painting (when he had been given his
Roman numeral, his name—the other sheds around him all had
ordinary numbers), he held up his tar-papered roof to the moon
as he dried. “Where am I?” he thought. “Who am I?”

Above him was the dark sky and inside him stood the brand-
new bicycles. A beam of light from the lamp in the yard shone on
them through a crack, and the bells on their handlebars gleamed
and twinkled more mysteriously than the stars. Higher up, a plas-
tic hoop hung on the wall, and with the very thinnest of his
planks Number XII recognized it as a symbol of the eternal rid-
die of creation which was also represented—so very wonder-
fully—in his own soul. On the shelves lay all sorts of stupid trifles
that lent variety and uniqueness to his inner world. Dill and
scented herbs hung drying on a thread stretched from one wall to
another, reminding him of something that never ever happens to
sheds—but since they reminded him of it anyway, sometimes it
seemed that he once must have been not a mere shed, but a dacha,
or at the very least a garage. :

He became aware of himself, and realized that what he was

aware of, that is himself, was made up of numerous small indi-
vidual features: of the unearthly personalities of machines for
conquering distance, which smelled of rubber and steel; of the
mystical introspection of the self-enclosed hoop; of the squeak-
ing in the souls of the small items, such as the nails and nuts
which were scattered along the shelves; and of other things.
Within each of these existences there was an infinity of subtle
variation, but still for him each was linked with one important
thing, some decisive feeling—and fusing together, these feelings
gave rise to a new unity, defined in space by the freshly painted
planks, but not actually limited by anything. That was him,
Number XII, and above his head the moon was his equal as it
rushed through the mist and the clouds. . . . That night was
when his life really began. .

Soon Number XII realized that he liked most of all the sen-
sation which was derived from or transmitted by the bicycles.
Sometimes on a hot summer day, when the world around him
grew quiet, he would secretly identify himself in turn with the ~
“Sputnik” and the folding “Kama” and experience two different
kinds of happiness.

In this state he might easily find himself forty miles away
from his real location, perhaps rolling across a deserted bridge .
over a canal bounded by concrete banks, or along the violet bor-
der of the sun-baked highway, turning into the tunnels formed by
the high bushes lining a narrow dirt track and then hurtling along
it until he emerged onto another road leading to the forest,
through the forest, through the open fields, straight up into the
orange sky above the horizon: he could probably have carried on
riding along the road till the end of his life, but he didn’t want to,
because what brought him happiness was the possibility itself. He
might find himself in the city, in some yard where long stems
grew out of the pavement cracks, and spend the evening there—
in fact he could do almost anything.

When he tried to share some of his experiences with the oc-
cult-minded garage that stood beside him, the answer he received

was that in fact there is only one higher happiness: the ecstatic
union with the archetypal garage. So how could he tell his neigh-
bor about two different kinds of perfect happiness, one of which
folded away, while the other had three-speed gears?

“You mean I should try to feel like a garage too?” he asked
one day. ,

“There is no other path,” replied the garage. “Of course,
you’re not likely to succeed, but your chances are better than
those of a kennel or a tobacco kiosk.”

“And what if I like feeling like a bicycle?” asked Number
XII, revealing his cherished secret.

“By all means, feel like one. I can’t say you mustn’t,” said the
garage. “For some of us feelings of the lower kind are the limit,
and there’s nothing to be done about it.”

“What’s that written in chalk on your side?” Number XII in-
quired.

“None of your business, you cheap piece of plywood shit,”
the garage replied with unexpected malice.

Of course, Number XII had only made the remark because
he felt offended—who wouldn’t by having his aspirations termed
“lower”? After this incident there could be no question of associ-
ating with the garage, but Number XII didn’t regret it. One
morning the garage was demolished, and Number XII was left
alone.

Actually, there were two other sheds quite close, to his left,
but he tried not to think about them. Not because they were built
differently and painted a dull, indefinite color—he could have
reconciled himself with that. The problem was something else:
on the ground floor of the five-storey prefab where Number
XII’s owners lived there was a big vegetable shop and these sheds
served as its warehouses. They were used for storing carrots,
potatoes, beets, and cucumbers, but the factor absolutely domi-
nating. every aspect of Number 13 and Number 14 was the pick-
led cabbage in two huge barrels covered with plastic. Number
XII had often seen their great hollow bodies girt with steel hoops


surrounded by a retinue of emaciated workmen who were rolling
them out at an angle into the yard. At these times he felt afraid
and he recalled one of the favorite maxims of the deceased
garage, whom he often remembered with sadness, “There are
some things in life which you must simply turn your back on as
quickly as possible.” And no sooner did he recall the maxim than
he applied it. The dark and obscure life of his neighbors, their
sour exhalations, and obtuse grip on life were a threat.to Number
XII: the very existence of these squat structures was enough to
negate everything else. Every drop of brine in their barrels de-
clared that Number XII’s existence in the universe was entirely
unnecessary: that, at least, that was how he interpreted the vibra-
tions radiating from their consciousness of the world.

But the day came to an end, ‘the light grew thick, Number
XII was a bicycle rushing along a deserted highway and any
memories of the horrors of the day seemed simply ridiculous.

It was the middle of the summer when the lock clanked, the
hasp was thrown back, and two people entered Number XII: his
owner and a woman. Number XII did not like her—somehow she
reminded him of everything that he simply could not stand. Not
that this impression sprang from the fact that she smelled of
pickled cabbage—rather the opposite: it was the smell of pickled
cabbage that conveyed some information about this woman, that
somehow or other she was the very embodiment of the fermenta-
tion and the oppressive force of will to which Numbers 13 and 14
owed their present existence,

Number XII began to think, while the two people went on
talking:

“Well, if we take down the shelves it’ll do fine, just fine. . . .”

“This is a first-class shed,” replied his owner, wheeling the
bicycles outside. “No leaks or any other problems. And what a
color!”

After wheeling out the bicycles and leaning them against the
wall, he began untidily gathering together everything lying on
the shelves. It was then that Number XII began to feel upset.

Of course, the bicycles had often disappeared for certain pe-
riods of time, and he knew how to use his memory to fill in the
gap. Afterwards, when the bicycles were returned to their places,
he was always amazed how inadequate the image his memory cre-
ated was in comparison with the actual beauty that the bicycles
simply radiated into space. Whenever they disappeared the bicy-
cles always returned, and these short separations from the most
important part of his own soul lent Number XII’s life its unpre-
dictable charm. But this time everything was different—the bicy-
cles were being taken away forever.

He realized this from the unceremonious way that the man in
the red pants was wreaking total devastation in him—nothing
like this had ever happened before. The woman in the white coat
had left long ago, but his owner was still rummaging around, rak-
ing tools into a bag, and taking down the old cans and patched
inner tubes from the wall. Then a truck backed up to his door,
and both bicycles dived obediently after the overfilled bags into
its gaping tarpaulin maw.

Number XII was empty, and his door stood wide open.

Despite everything he continued to be himself. The souls of
all that life had taken away continued to dwell in him, and al-
though they had become shadows of themselves they still fused
together to make him Number XII: but it now required all the
willpower he could muster to maintain his individuality.

In the morning he noticed a change in himself. No longer in-
terested in the world around him, his attention was focused ex-
clusively on the past, moving in concentric rings of memory. He
could explain this: when he left, his owner had forgotten the
hoop, and now it was the only real part of his otherwise phantom
soul, which was why Number XII felt like a closed circle. But he
didn’t have enough strength to feel really anything about this, or
wonder if it was good or bad. A dreary, colorless yearning overlay
every other feeling. A month passed like that.

One day workmen arrived, entered his defenseless open door,
and in the space of a few minutes broke down the shelves. Num-

ber XII wasn’t even fully aware of his new condition before his
feelings overwhelmed him—which incidentally demonstrates
that he still had enough vital energy left in him to experience fear.

They were rolling a barrel towards him across the yard. To-
wards him! In his great depths of nostalgic self-pity, he’d never
dreamed anything could be worse than what had already hap-
pened—that this could be possible!

The barrel was a fearful sight. Huge and potbellied, it was
very old, and its sides were impregnated with something hideous
which gave out such a powerful stench that even the workers an-
gling it along, who were certainly no strangers to the seamy side
of life, turned their faces away and swore. And Number XII
could also see something that the men couldn’t: the barrel exuded
an aura of cold attention as it viewed the world through the damp
likeness of an eye. Number XII did not see them roll it inside and
circle it around on the floor to set it at his very center—he had
fainted.

Suffering maims. Two days passed before Number XII began
to recover his thoughts and his feelings. Now he was different,
and everything in him was different. At the very center of his
soul, at the spot once occupied by the bicycles’ windswept
frames, there was pulsating repulsive living death, concentrated
in the slow existence of the barrel and its equally slow thoughts,
which were now Number XIV’s thoughts. He could feel the fer-
mentation of the rotten brine, and the bubbles rose in him to
burst on the surface, leaving holes in the layer of green mold.
The swollen corpses of the cucumbers were shifted about by the
gas, and the slime-impregnated boards strained against their
rusty iron hoops inside him. All of it was him.

Numbers 13 and 14 no longer frightened him—on the con-
trary, he rapidly fell into a half-unconscious state of comradery
with them. But the past had not totally disappeared; it had simply
been pushed aside, squashed into a corner. Number XII’s new
life was a double one. On the one hand, he felt himself the equal

of Numbers 13 and 14, and yet on the other hand, buried some-
where deep inside him, there remained a sense of terrible injus-
tice about what had happened to him. But his new existence’s
center was located in the barrel, which emitted the constant gur-
gling and crackling sounds that had replaced the imagined
whooshing of tires over concrete.

Numbers 13 and 14 explained to him that all he had gone
through was just a normal life change that comes with age.

“The entry into the real world, with its real difficulties and
concerns, always involves certain difficulties,” Number 13 would
say. “One’s soul is occupied with entirely new problems.”

And he would add some words of encouragement: “Never
mind, you’ll get used to it. It’s only hard at the beginning.”

Number 14 was a shed with a rather philosophical turn of
mind. He often spoke of spiritual matters, and soon managed to
convince his new comrade that if the beautiful consisted of har-
mony (“That’s for one,” he would say) and inside you—objec-
tively speaking now—you had pickled cucumbers or pickled cab-
bage (“That’s for two”), then the beauty of life consisted in
achieving harmony with the contents of the barrel and removing
all obstacles hindering that. An old dictionary of philosophical
terms had been wedged under his own barrel to keep it from
overflowing, and he often quoted from it. It helped him explain to
Number XII how he should live his life. Number 14 never did
feel complete.confidence in the novice, however, sensing some-
thing in him that Number 14 no longer sensed in himself.

But gradually Number XII became genuinely resigned to the
situation. Sometimes he even experienced a certain inspiration,
an upsurge of the will to live this new life. But his new friends’
mistrust was well founded. On several occasions Number XII
caught glimpses of something forgotten, like a gleam of light
through a keyhole, and then he would be overwhelmed by a feel-
ing of intense contempt for himself—and he simply hated the
other two.

Naturally, all of this was suppressed by the cucumber bar-


rel’s invincible worldview, and Number XII soon began to won-
der what it was he’d been getting so upset about. He became sim-
pler and the past gradually bothered him less because it was
growing hard for him to keep up with the fleeting flashes of
memory. More and more often the barrel seemed like a guarantee
of stability and peace, like the ballast of a ship, and sometimes
Number XII imagined himself like that, like a ship sailing out
into tomorrow.

He began to feel the barrel’s innate good nature, but only
after he had finally opened his own soul to it. Now the cucumbers
seemed almost like children to him.

_Numbers 13 and 14 weren’t bad comrades—and most impor-
tantly, they lent him support in his new existence. Sometimes in
the evening the three of them would silently classify the objects
of the world, imbuing everything around them with an all-em-
bracing spirit of understanding, and when one of the new little
huts that had recently been built nearby shuddered he would look
at it and think: “How stupid, but never mind, it’ll sow its wild
oats and then it’ll come to understand. . . .” He saw several
such transformations take place before his own eyes, and each
one served to confirm the correctness of his opinion yet again.
He also experienced a feeling of hatred when anything unneces-
sary appeared in the world, but thank God, that didn’t happen
often. The days and the years passed, and it seemed that nothing
would change again.

One summer evening, glancing around inside himself, Num-
ber XII came across an incomprehensible object, a plastic hoop
draped with cobwebs. At first he couldn’t make out what it was or
what it might be for, and then suddenly he recalled that there
were so many things that once used to be connected with this
item. The barrel inside him was dozing, and some other part of
him cautiously pulled in the threads of memory, but all of them
were broken and they led nowhere. But there was something
once, wasn’t there? Or was there? He concentrated and tried to


understand what it was he couldn’t remember, and for a moment
he stopped feeling the barrel and was somehow separate from it.

At that very moment a bicycle entered the yard and for no
reason at all the rider rang the bell on his handlebars twice. It was
enough—Number XII remembered:

A bicycle. A highway. A sunset. A bridge over a river.

He remembered who he really was and at last became him-
self, really himself. Everything connected with the barrel dropped
off like a dry scab. He suddenly smelt the repulsive stench of the
brine and saw his comrades of yesterday, Numbers 13 and 14, for
what they really were. But there was no time to think about all
this, he had to hurry: he knew that if he didn’t do what he had to
do now, the hateful barrel would overpower him again and turn
him into itself.

Meanwhile the barrel had woken up and realized that some-
thing was happening. Number XII felt the familiar current of
cold obtuseness he’d been used to thinking was his own. The bar-
rel was awake and starting to fill him—there was only one answer
he could make.

Two electric wires ran under his eaves. While the barrel was
still getting its bearings and working out exactly what was wrong,
he did the only thing he could. He squeezed the wires together
with all his might, using some new power born of despair. A mo-
ment later he was overwhelmed by the invincible force emanating
from the cucumber barrel, and for.a while he simply ceased to
exist.

But the deed was done: torn from their insulation, the wires
touched, and where they met a purplish-white flame sprang into
life. A second later a fuse blew and the current disappeared from
the wires, but a narrow ribbon of smoke was already snaking up
the dry planking. Then more flames appeared, and meeting no
resistance they began to spread and creep towards the roof.

Number XII came round after the first blow and realized that
the barrel“had decided to annihilate him totally. Compressing his
entire being into one of the upper planks in his ceiling, he could


feel that the barrel was not alone—it was being helped by Num-
bers 13 and 14, who were directing their thoughts at him from
outside.

“Obviously,” Number XII thought with a strange sense of
detachment, “what they are doing now must seem to them like
restraining a madman, or perhaps they see an enemy spy whose
cunning pretence to be one of them has now been exposed—”.

He never finished the thought, because at that moment the
barrel threw all its rottenness against the boundaries of his exis-
tence with redoubled: force. He withstood the blow, but realized
that the next one would finish him, and he prepared to die, But
time passed, and no new blow came. He expanded his boundaries
a little and felt two things—first, the barrel’s fear, as cold and
sluggish as every sensation it manifested; and second, the flames
blazing all around, which were already closing in on the ceiling
plank animated by Number XII. The walls were ablaze, the tar-
paper roof was weeping fiery tears, and the plastic bottles of sun-
flower oil were burning on the floor. Some of them were bursting,
and the brine was boiling in the barrel, which for all its ponder-
ous might was obviously dying. Number XII extended himself
over to the section of the roof that was still left, and summoned
up the memory of the day he was painted, and more importantly,
of that night: he wanted to die with that thought. Beside him he
saw Number 13 was already ablaze, and that was the last thing he
noticed. Yet death still didn’t come, and when his final splinter
burst into flames, something quite unexpected happened.

The director of Vegetable Shop 17, the same woman who had
visited Number XII with his owner, was walking home in a foul
mood. That evening, at six o’clock, the shed where the oil and cu-
cumbers were stored had suddenly caught fire. The spilled oil
had spread the fire to the other sheds—in short, everything that
could burn had burned. All that was left of hut Number XII were
the keys, and huts Number 13 and 14 were now no more than a°
few scorched planks.

While the reports were being drawn up and the explanations
were being made to the firemen, darkness had fallen, and now the
director ‘felt afraid as she walked along the empty road with the
trees standing on each side like bandits. She stopped and looked
back to make sure no one was following her. There didn’t seem to
be anyone there. She took a few more steps, then glanced round
again, and she thought she could see something twinkling in the
distance. Just in case, she went to the edge of the road and stood
behind a tree. Staring intently into the darkness, she waited to see
what would happen. At the most distant visible point of the road
a bright spot came into view. “A motorcycle!” thought the direc-
tor, pressing hard against the tree trunk. But there was no sound
of an engine.

The bright spot moved closer, until she could see that it was
not moving on the surface of the road but flying along above it. A
moment later, and the spot of light was transformed into some-
thing totally unreal—a bicycle without a rider, flying at a height
of ten or twelve feet. It was strangely made; it somehow looked as
though it had been crudely nailed together out of planks. But
strangest of all was that it glowed and flickered and changed
color, sometimes turning transparent and then blazing with an
unbearably intense brightness. Completely entranced, the direc-
tor walked out into the middle of the road, and to her appearance
the bicycle quite clearly responded. Reducing its height and
speed, it turned a few circles in the air above the dazed woman’s
head. Then it rose higher and hung motionless before swinging
round stiffly above the road like a weather vane. It hung there for
another moment or two and then finally began to move, gathering
speed at an incredible rate until it was no more than a bright dot
in the sky. Then that disappeared as well.

When she recovered her senses, the director found herself
sitting in the. middle of the road. She stood up, shook herself off,
completely forgetting. . . . But then, she’s of no interest to us.