Now THAT HER GENTLE
breathing has dissolved back into the world—into this cloudy sky
and this cold spring wind—and the volume of Bunin lies here on
my knees like a heavy brick, I occasionally lift my eyes from the
page to look over at her photograph, which has survived by
chance, hanging on the wall.

She was much younger than me. We were thrown together by
the whim of fate, and I never believed that her attachment to me
was any kind of response to my good qualities. Rather, if I might
borrow a term from physiology, for her I was the irritant which
produced certain reflex reactions which would have remained the
same if my place were taken by some research physicist, a corrupt
member of the State Duma, or anyone else capable of appreciat-
ing her swarthy southern charm and easing the burden of exis-
tence so far from her ancient homeland, in this barren northern
country where she had been born through some strange misun-
derstanding. When she buried her head in my chest, I slowly ran
my fingers down her neck and imagined another palm on that
delicate curve—a hand with pale, slim fingers and a ring with a
small skull, or a coarse, hairy hand bearing blue anchors and
dates—sliding along her throat just as slowly, and I felt that the
change would leave her heart entirely untouched. I never called


her by her full name. For me “Veronica” was a botanical term; it
summoned up memories from some distant childhood flowerbed
of white blossoms with a stifling smell. I only used its last two
syllables, which didn’t make the slightest difference to her. She
wasn’t the least bit sensitive to the music of speech, and she had
never even heard of her near namesake, the headless, winged god-
dess of victory.

My friends took an instant dislike to her. Perhaps they could
tell that the magnanimity with which they’d accépted her, if only
for a few minutes, into their circle, went completely unnoticed.
But to expect anything else from Nika would have been as stupid
as to expect a pedestrian walking along the sidewalk to feel a
sense of gratitude towards the workers who'd laid down the ce-
ment. The people who surrounded her were no more than talking
cupboards that appeared for some incomprehensible reason and
then disappeared for reasons equally incomprehensible. Though
Nika had no interest in the feelings of others, she instinctively
sensed their attitude to her, and when I had visitors, she would
most often get up and go into the kitchen. My friends weren’t
overtly rude to her, but they made no secret of their disdain when
she wasn’t around. Not a single one of them, of course, consid-
ered her an equal.

“What’s wrong?” one of them asked me with an ironical
smile. “Can’t your Nika even stand the sight of me?” That she re-
ally couldn’t never crossed his mind. He assumed with odd
naiveté that in Nika’s heart of hearts she adored and idolized
him.

“You haven’t got a clue how to train them,” another one said
in a moment of drunken intimacy. “I’d have her smooth as silk in
a week.”

I knew that he knew what he was talking about, because his
wife had been training him for more than three years—but the
last thing I wanted was to be someone’s trainer.

Not that Nika was indifferent to her comforts. With patho-
logical regularity she would turn up in the same armchair that I


wanted to sit in. But objects only existed for her as long as she
wag using them, and then they disappeared, probably because she
had practically nothing of her own at all. I sometimes thought
that she was the exact type the old-style communists had at-
tempted to breed, without the slightest idea of what the result of

their efforts might look like. She paid no attention to other peo- °

ple’s feelings, not because she had a bad character, but because
she often had no idea that these feelings existed. When she acci-
dentally broke an old Kuznetsov porcelain sugar bowl that stood
on a cupboard and an hour later, on a sudden impulse, I slapped
her for it, Nika simply did not understand why I had hit her. She
darted out of the room, and when I went to apologize, she turned
her back to me and faced the wall. For Nika the sugar bowl was
nothing more than a shiny truncated cone, stuffed full of papers.
For me it was a kind of storehouse for all the proofs of the reality
of existence which I had gathered through life: a page from a
long-destroyed address book with a telephone number which I
had never dialed; a ticket to the “Illusion” cinema with the stub
still intact; a smali photo; and several prescriptions that had never
been filled. I was ashamed of hitting Nika, but apologizing would
have been stupid. I didn’t know what to do, so I addressed her in
a complex, rhetorical style:

“Nika, don’t be angry. Old junk can have a strange power
over a person. To throw out an old pair of broken glasses is to
admit that the entire world seen through them is gone forever, or
on the contrary, which is the same thing, it doesn’t exist yet—that
world lies somewhere in the kingdom of imminent non-existence.
... Nika, if only you could understand me. . . . Frag-
ments of the past become something like anchors binding the
heart to things that no longer exist, which in turn demonstrates
that what is usually called the heart does not exist either, be-
cause—” I glanced down at her and saw that she was yawning.
God only knows what she was thinking about, but my words were
certainly not penetrating her lovely little head. I might just as
well have been talking to the sofa she was sitting on.


That evening I was particularly gentle with Nika, and yet I
couldn’t rid myself of the thought that for her there was little dif-
ference between my hands running over her body and the
branches which caressed her sides when we were out walking in
the woods. At that time we still took our walks together.

We were together every day, but I was sober-minded enough
to realize that we could never be genuinely close. She never sus-
pected that at the very moment she was pressing her lithe body
against me, I might be somewhere quite different, I might com-
pletely forget that she existed. In the final analysis she was shal-
low and vain, and her needs were purely physiological: a full
belly, a good sleep, and enough physical affection to maintain a
sound digestion. She would. doze for hours in front of the televi-
sion, scarcely even glancing at the screen, eating a little now and
then (she preferred fatty food), and she was very fond of sleep-
ing. I don’t think I ever once saw her with a book. But her youth
and natural elegance lent every manifestation of her character an
illusory spiritual content. In her animalistic ways (which is all
they were if one thought about it) there was some reflected glim-
mer of a supreme harmony, a glimpse of the elusive goal that art
seeks hopelessly to attain. J began to think that this simple life
was truly beautiful and meaningful, and that my own life was
based on nothing but fictions invented by others. I used to dream
of discovering what she thought of me, but it was pointless trying
to get any answers out of her, and she kept no diary that I could
have read in secret.

Suddenly one day I realized that I was genuinely interested
in her world. She had a habit of sitting at the window for long pe-
riods, looking down. Once I stood behind her, put my hand on
the back of her neck (she trembled slightly, but didn’t pull away),
and tried to guess what she was looking at and what she made of
what she saw.

The scene in front of us was a typical Moscow yard: a sand-
pit with a couple of children scrabbling in it, a small log play-
house, a horizontal bar on which people beat carpets, a red metal

tent-frame made of welded pipes, dumpsters, crows, and a lamp-
post. The red metal frame depressed me most of all, probably be-
cause in my childhood, on a grey winter day, my spirit had once
been crushed by the weight of a huge volume from East Germany
devoted to the long-vanished culture of the mammoth-hunters.
Theirs was a remarkably durable civilization which existed en-
tirely without change for several thousand years some-
where in Siberia. The people lived in small, hemispheric houses
made of mammoth skins stretched over a framework which pre-
cisely reproduced the geometry of the modern red playground
structures, but were made of mammoth tusks lashed together in-
stead of welded iron pipes. In that big book the life of these
hunters—a romantic and entirely inappropriate term for the un-
washed scavengers who once a month lured a large, unsuspecting
animal into a pit with pointed stakes at the bottom—was de-
scribed in great detail, and I was astonished by what I learned
about their daily life, their territory, even their faces. Then and
there I drew the first logical conclusion of my life: the German
artist who illustrated the book must have been a Soviet prisoner.
These red hemispheres standing in almost every yard have ever
- since seemed to me to be an echo of the culture from which we
sprang. There was another echo in the small herds of porcelain
mammoths that had wandered out of the depths of millenia into
the future and on to millions of Russian sideboards. We have
other ancestors, too, I thought. For instance the Tripolye people
from the age-old steppes who thousands of years ago practiced
agriculture and animal husbandry; in their free time they carved
small stone figures of naked women with big fat bottoms (large
numbers of these “Venuses,” as they are now known, have sur-
vived) which evidently stood in the icon-corner of every house.
We also know that the log houses on their collective farms were
laid out according to a strict plan, with a wide main street, and
that all the houses in a village were absolutely identical. The little
playground log hut that Nika and I were looking at was a remnant
of this culture. A little gir] in rubber boots had been sitting in

there for over an hour. She herself could not be seen, all that was
visible were the light blue boots swinging to and fro.

“My God,” I thought, holding Nika close, “and how much I could
say about the sandpit—and the dumpsters—and the lamppost—”

But all of that would still be my world, which I was thor-
oughly sick of, and had no way out of. Mental constructs cluster
like flies on the surface.of any object reflected on the retinas of
my eyes. Nika was entirely free of the degrading necessity to con-
nect the flame hovering over a dumpster with the 1773 Fire of
Moscow or the burping croak of the satisfied crow beside the
grocery store with the ancient Roman omen recorded in “Julian
the Apostate.” But what, in that case, did her soul consist of?

My brief interest in her inner world, which I could not enter
even though Nika herself was entirely in my power, was obvi-
ously stimulated by a desire to change, to rid myself of the con-
stant clamor of thoughts which had dug a deep rut out of which
they could no longer escape. Nothing really new had happened to
me for a long time, and I hoped that by being close to Nika I
would be able to discover some new, unfamiliar way of feeling and
living. When I confessed to myself that when she gazed out the
window she simply saw what was there—that her intellect was
not the least bit inclined to journeying through the past and the
future, but was quite content with the present—I realized that I
was not actually dealing with the real Nika at all, but with a set of
my own thoughts. What I saw, and what I would always see, was
only my own conception, which had assumed her form. Nika
herself, sitting only a foot away, was as inaccessible as the spire of
the Kremlin’s Spasskaya Tower. Once again I felt on my shoul-
ders the weightless but unbearable burden of solitude.

“You know, Nika,” I said, moving away from her, “I don’t
give a damn why you look out there or what you see.”

She looked round at me and then turned back to the window.
She was used to my childish outbursts, and what’s more, al-
though she would never have admitted it, she didn’t give a damn
about anything I said either.

I moved rapidly from one extreme to the other. Once con-
vinced that the mystery of her greenish eyes was merely an optical
phenomenon, I decided that J knew all there was to know about
her; my attachment was diluted by a slight contempt, which I
scarcely attempted to conceal, believing that she wouldn’t notice
it. But soon IJ felt she was finding the monotonous seclusion of our
life irksome, and she was becoming nervous and irritable.

It was spring and I stayed home almost all the time, and she
had to stay with me, while outside the window the grass was
already green and behind the thin grey film of hazy clouds
stretched across the sky, the watery sun was twice its normal size.
I don’t remember when she first went out for a walk without me,
but I do remember how I felt about it. I let her go without any
particular feeling of nervousness, fending off the feeble thought
that I ought to go with her.

It wasn’t so much that I had started to find her company dull,
but simply that I had begun to regard her in the same way she
had regarded me from the very beginning, the way one regards a

chair or a cactus or a round cloud in the sky outside. Usually, in |

order to maintain the illusion of my former concern, I would see
her to the door of the stairwell, mumble something vague to her
as she left, and then go back into my apartment. She never used
the elevator, but always ran down the stairs with swift, silent
steps. I don’t think it was out of any kind of physical vanity—she
really was so young and full of energy that it was easier for her to
dash down the stairs in two minutes, scarcely touching them as she

went, than to spend the same amount of time waiting for the ar-

rival of a humming, coffinlike cabin flooded with harsh yellow
light, which smelled of urine and glorified “Depeche Mode.” (Asa
matter of fact, Nika was absolutely indifferent to this group and to
rock in general; the only music that I can remember arousing her
interest was the track on Pink Floyd’s Animals where a distant syn-
thesizer, like a military truck full of barking electronic dogs, rum-
bles towards the front line through heavy clouds of hash smoke.)

I was interested in where she went, not interested enough to

 

spy on her, but enough to make me go out on the balcony with my
binoculars a few minutes after she left. I never pretended to my-
self that what I was doing was right. Her simple walks led her
along the avenue past intersecting paths, past benches, past a stall
selling soft drinks, and past the spiral staircase that led to the spe-
cial orders department of the grocery store. Then she turned be-
hind a tall green sixteen-storey building, towards the woods
beyond the wide dusty vacant lot. After that I lost sight of her.
God, how J would have loved to be her just for a few seconds, and
see with new eyes everything that I no longer even noticed. Only
then did I realize I simply wanted to stop being myself—that is,
to stop existing at all. The longing for the new is one of the most
common forms assumed by suicidal impulses in our country.

I thought of the English saying, “Everyone has a skeleton in
the closet.” Something prevents the English, who generally think
clearly about things, from proceeding to the final truth. The most
terrible thing is that the skeleton in your closet is not just an ob-
ject you happen to own, but actually your own skeleton, and the
“closet” is a euphemism for the body out of which this skeleton
will emerge some day when the closet disappears. I never thought
of the closet I called Nika as containing any skeleton. I never
imagined that she could die. Everything about her contradicted
the very meaning of the word. She was life condensed, in the
same way as milk can be condensed. One icy winter evening, she
went out completely naked onto the snow-covered balcony, when
suddenly a pigeon settled on the railing: Nika squatted down, as
though afraid of frightening it away, and froze. A minute went by,
and as I stood there admiring her swarthy back, I was astonished
to realize that she didn’t feel the cold, or had simply forgotten all
about it.

That was why her death failed to make any particular im-
pression on me. It simply did not fit into the realm of conscious-
ness associated with feelings; it did not become an emotional fact.
Perhaps this was some kind of psychological response to the fact
that it was all the result of my own actions. I did not kill her, of

course, not with my own hands, but it was me who jolted the in-
visible tram of fate into motion along the rails, even though it
only caught up with her many days later. I was to blame for initi-
ating the long chain of events which terminated in her death.
That disgusting animal, for some reason known by some as the
“Patriot,” with his drooling, gaping jaws and slanting, hairy fore-
head, who was the jast thing she saw in this life, was merely the
specific form in which her death was realized, nothing more. It
is pointless to seek a culprit. Every sentence finds its own exe-
cutioner, and every one of us is an accomplice in a mass of mur-
ders. Everything in the world is interwoven, and the links of
cause and effect can never be traced or restored. Who can tell
whether or not by giving up a subway seat to some spiteful old
woman we have condemned the children of Zanzibar to starva-
tion? The extent of our foresight and responsibility is too limited,
and in the final analysis all causes lead back into infinity, to the
creation of the world.

It was a day in March, but the winter was still hard. The fog
outside the window was black as a sailor’s pea jacket, and I could
scarcely make. out the rusty zieg heil of the pile-driving crane
looming up on the nearby construction site. When a pile had
been smashed into the ground and the rumbling died away,
drunken voices and swearing emerged from the fog, dominated
by one high, vibrant tenor. Then there was a clanging as they
dragged over another metal pile, and the heavy blows rang out
again. When darkness came, it was a little easier. I sat in the arm-
chair opposite Nika, who was stretched out on the sofa, and
began leafing through a book by Gaito Gazdanov. I was in the
habit of reading aloud, and the fact that she never listened did
not bother me in the least. The only indulgence I allowed myself
was to emphasize the intonation in certain places. “She could not
be called secretive, but it required long acquaintance or emotional
intimacy in order to discover how her life had been passed, what
she liked, what she disliked, what interested her, what she valued
the people she encountered. I never heard any utterance from her


which defined her attitudes, although I spoke with her on the
most various of topics. She usually listened in silence. Over many
weeks I learned only a little more about her than in the first days.
She had no reason at all to conceal anything from me, it was sim-
ply the consequence of her natural reticence, which was bound to
appear strange to me. Whatever I asked her, she was reluctant to
answer, and this always surprised me. . . .”

Another thing always surprised me: when I thought about it,
almost every book and every poem was dedicated to Nika, what-
ever she might be called and whatever form she might assume.
The more intelligent and subtle the artist, the more indecipher-
able and inaccessible her mystery became. The finest efforts of
the finest souls had been spent on storming this silent, green-
eyed inscrutability, and all of them had been dashed to pieces
against an invisible or simply nonexistent—and therefore truly in-
superable—barrier. All that was left of even the brilliant
Vladimir Nabokov, who managed at the final moment to take
shelter behind his lyrical hero, were two sad eyes and a phallus a
foot long (I explained the latter by the fact that he wrote his fa~
mous novel a long way from Mother Russia with its metric sys-
tem). “And slowly making her way through the drunks, always
unaccompanied, always alone . . . ,” I mumbled in my reverie
as J meditated on the mystery of this silence that had captured so
many different hearts on its swift journey through the ages. “The
Greek divan was fluffy, and the wall was covered in sweeping mu-
rals. . . .” I fell asleep over my book, and when I woke up Nika
was not in the room.

I had noticed long before that she went out for short periods
at night. I thought she needed a brief constitutional stroll before
bed or a few minutes’ conversation with others like herself who
gathered in the circle of light outside the entrance, where there
was always music playing on somebody’s cassette deck. I think
she had a friend called Masha, bright and ginger-haired. I saw
them together a couple of times. I had no objection to all of this; I
even left the door open so that she would not wake me with her

fumbling in the dark corridor and would know I was aware of her
strolls in the night. The only thing I did feel was my usual jeal-
ousy that some aspects of the world were once again escaping my
grasp. But I never even thought of going out with her, I realized
how out of place I would be in that setting, and I would hardly
find the company very interesting. Even so I still felt slightly of-
fended that she had a circle of acquaintances which was closed
to me. .

When I woke with my book on my knee and saw I was alone
in the room, I suddenly wanted to go downstairs for a while and
smoke a cigarette on the bench in front of the entrance. I decided
that if I saw Nika, I would not betray our connection in any way.
Going down in the elevator, I even imagined how she would
tremble when she saw me, but then, noting my indifference, she
would turn back to Masha (for some reason I was sure they would
be sitting together on the bench) and continue the quiet conver-
sation that only they could understand.

There was nobody outside the door, and I was suddenly un-
certain that I would meet her. A brown Mercedes sportscar was
parked right beside the bench. I had seen it occasionally on the
streets nearby, and sometimes here in front of the building. It was
clearly the same car, because its license plate was so easy to recog-
nize, KRA or KAM, or something of the sort. There was quiet
music coming from the second floor, the bushes were swaying
gently in‘the wind, and the snow was gone from the ground.
“Soon it will be spring,” I thought. But it was still cold.

When I went back inside, the old woman like a dried rose
who sat at her post by the door raised her eyes to look at me in
disapproval. It was time to lock the front door. Going up in the
elevator, I thought about the old janitors down in the basement,
pensioners on the final shift of the old Party generation, still
holding aloft the final living branch from the withered tree of the
people’s unity. From the intense, tragic look in their eyes it was
obvious that they could not drag this branch very much further
into the future, and they had no one to hand it on to. On the land-



ing I stretched for a last time and opened the staircase door to
flick away my cigarette butt. I heard strange sounds on the land-
ing below, leaned over the railings, and saw Nika.

Perhaps a person of rather more refined psychology might
have concluded that she had chosen this very spot, only a few
steps from her own apartment, in order to experience some spe-
cial kind of pleasure, to take satisfaction in the violation of hearth
and home. The thought never entered my head—I knew that
would be too complicated for Nika—but what I saw roused an in-
stinctive revulsion in me. The two bodies fused together in con-
vulsive movement under the flickering faulty lamp looked like an
animated sewing machine, and the squealing, which could
scarcely be taken for human, was like the squeaking of its unoiled
gears. J do not know how tong I watched all this, a single second ‘
or several minutes. Suddenly I was looking into Nika’s eyes and
of its own accord my hand raised the rusty lid of the trash can,
which a moment later smashed against the wall and clattered
down onto her head.

I obviously scared them very badly. They dashed down the
stairs, and I had time to recognize who Nika had been with. He
lived somewhere in our building, and I had seen him several
times on the staircase when the elevator was switched off. He had
expressionless eyes, vulgar colorless moustaches, and a strong air
of self-importance. Once I saw him rummaging in a garbage can,
still maintaining that same air; as I walked past he raised his eyes
and stared at me. When I had gone a few steps down the stairs
and he was sure I was no competition, I heard the rustling of
potato peels start up again behind me as he continued his search.
I had long suspected that Nika liked his kind, animals in the full
sense of the word, and she would always be attracted to them, no
matter whom she herself might resemble in the moonlight, or
any other light.

She did not really resemble anyone at all, I thought as I
opened the door to the apartment. If, when I look at her, she ap-
pears like some perfect work of art, then this has something to do


with me, and nothing to do with her. All of the beauty I see is
contained in my own heart, because that is where I keep the tun-
ing fork with the note against which I measure everything else.
Always confusing myself with my own image, I think that Iam
dealing with something external, but the world around me is only
a system of mirrors with various curvatures. We are arranged ina
strange fashion, I pondered, we only see what we intend to see,
but we see it in the most minute detail (including faces and posi-
tions) in place of what we are actually witnessing—like Humbert
Humbert, taking the fat social-democratic elbow in the window
next door for the knee of his motionless nymphette.

Nika did not come home that night, and early in the morning
I locked every lock on the door and left town for two weeks.
When I got back I was met by the pink-haired old janitor who
glanced at the three other old women sitting in a semicircle
round her table on chairs they had brought from their apart-
ments, and then loudly informed me that Nika had been there
several times, but had been unable to get into the apartment, and
had not been seen now for several days. The old women were
staring at me curiously, and I walked on by quickly. Even so I was
overtaken at the elevator by a comment on my moral condition. I
felt uneasy, because I had absolutely no idea where to look for her,
but I was certain that she would come back. I had a lot to do, and
I did not think of her again until the evening, but then the tele-
phone rang, and the old janitor woman, having clearly decided to
involve herself in my life, informed me that her name was
Tatyana Grigorievna and that she had just seen Nika downstairs.

The pavement in front of the building was turning dark
under the fine drizzle. By the entrance several girls were jumping
over a piece of taut elastic stretched neck-high and shouting
rhythmically as they dexterously threw their legs over it. The
wind carried a torn plastic bag over my head. Nika was nowhere
to be seen. I turned round the corner of the building and went to-
wards the woods hidden behind the houses. I wasn’t certain just
where I was going, but I was sure that I would meet Nika. When I

 



reached the final house before the vacant lot, the rain had almost
stopped, I went round the corner. She was standing in front of
the brown Mercedes with that odd license plate. It was parked
with dashing style, one wheel up on the sidewalk. The front door
was open and behind the windshield a man who looked like the
young Stalin dressed in a handsome striped jacket was smoking a
cigarette.

“Hi there, Nika!” I said, and stopped.

She glanced at me, but did not seem to recognize me. I
leaned forward and rested my hands on my knees. I had often
been told that her kind never forgives an insult, but I hadn’t taken
this seriously, probably because she had always forgiven me be-
fore. The man in the Mercedes turned a disdainful glance on me
and frowned slightly.

“Nika, forgive me, okay?” I whispered, trying not to take any
notice of him, and I held out my hands to her, only too painfully
aware of how vulgar this was. I took some comfort in the fact this
would hardly be sensed by Nika, or by the Georgian, who had
now bared his gold teeth behind the windshield. She lowered her
head as though thinking, and suddenly some indefinite detail
convinced me that she was about to take a step towards me, a step
away from this stolen Mercedes and the driver who was drilling a
hole in my head with eyes that perfectly matched the color of the
car, and in a few minutes I would bear her in past the old women
in our entry. I was already promising myself never to let her go
out alone again. Nika was going to take that step towards me, it
was as obvious as the falling raindrops, but suddenly she started
and dashed off to the side, and I heard a frightened child’s voice

shouting behind me.

“Stop! Do as you’re told! Stop!”

I looked round and saw a huge Alsatian dashing silently over
the grass towards us. His master, a boy wearing a cap with an im-
mense peak, was waving the dog’s collar and shouting.

“Patriot! Come back! Heel!”


hurtling over the surface of the grass; the small figure with one
arm raised in the air, as though to lash someone with a whip; sev-
eral motionless passersby looking in our direction. I remember
the thought that came to me at that moment: that even children
in American caps talk here in foreign slang. I heard a sharp
squealing of brakes behind me, and a woman screamed. Even as I
searched with my eyes for Nika, I knew what had happened. The
car—it was a flashy Lada with bright stickers on the back win-
dow, probably—picked up speed again. Evidently the driver was
frightened, even though it was not his fault. When I ran over, the
car was already out of sight round a bend. Out of the corner of
my eye J glimpsed the dog running back to its master. Suddenly
several people appeared out of nowhere, gazing in avid fascina-
tion at the unnaturally bright blood on the wet road.

“What a swine,” I heard a voice with a Georgian accent say
behind me. “He just drove on.”

“People like that should be shot,” said another voice, a woman’s.
“They’ve bought up everything, they have—What are you looking
at me like that for? I can see you’re one of them too. . . .”

The crowd behind me kept growing. Several other voices
joined in the conversation, but I wasn’t listening anymore. It had
started to rain again, and bubbles were drifting across the pud-
dles, drifting like our thoughts and hopes, like our lives. The
wind from the woods brought the first smells of summer, filled
with an inexpressible freshness which seemed to promise some-
thing that had never yet existed. I felt no grief and I was terribly
calm, but as I looked at her lifeless, dark form stretched out
across the cement, at her body which even after death had re-
tained its mysterious Siamese beauty, I knew that no matter how
my life might change, no matter what my tomorrow might bring,
no matter what might replace the things I loved and the things I
hated, I would never stand at my window holding any other cat.