So MY PARENTS DECIDED THEY WOULD OUTSMART EVERYONE...
When it began they piled me and a load of canned food into
a truck and took us to the country, the far-off and forgotten
country, somewhere beyond the Mur River. We'd bought a
cabin there for cheap a few years before, and mostly it just
stood there. We'd go at the end of June to pick wild straw-
berries (for my health), and then once more in August in time
for stray apples and plums and black cranberries in the aban-
doned orchards, and for raspberries and mushrooms in the
woods, The cabin was falling apart when we bought it, and
we never fixed anything. Then one fine day late in the spring,
after the mud had hardened a little, my father arranged things
with a man with a truck, and off we went with our groceries,
just like the new Robinson Crusoes, with all kinds of yard
tools and a rifle and a bloodhound called Red—who could,
theoretically, hunt rabbits.

Now my father began his feverish activity. Over in the
garden he plowed the earth—plowing the neighbors’ earth
in the process, so that he pulled out our fence posts and


planted them in the next yard. We dug up the vegetable patch,
planted three sacks of potatoes, groomed the apple trees. My
father went into the woods and brought back some turf for
the winter. And suddenly too we had a wheelbarrow. In gen-
eral my father was very active in the storerooms of our neigh-
bors’ boarded-up houses, picking up whatever might come
in handy: nails, old boards, shingles, pieces of tin, buckets,
benches, door handles, windowpanes, and all sorts of use-
ful old things, like well buckets, yarn spinners, grandfather
clocks, and then not-so-useful old things, like old iron tea-
kettles, iron oven parts, stove tops, and so on. ,

Three old women were the village’s sole inhabitants:

“Baba Anisya; Marfutka, who had reverted to semi-savagery;

and the red-headed Tanya, the only one with a family: her
kids would come around and bring things, and take other

things away—which is to say they’d bring canned food from

the city, cheese, butter, and cookies, and take away pickled
cucumbers, cabbage, potatoes. Tanya had.a rich basement
pantry and a good, enclosed front yard, and one of her grand-
children, a permanently ailing boy named Valera, often
stayed with her. His ears were always hurting, or else he was
covered with eczema. Tanya herself was a nurse by train-
ing, which training she received in a labor camp in Kolyma,
where she’d been sent at the age of seventeen for stealing a
suckling pig at her collective farm. She was popular, and she
kept her stove warm—the shepherdess Vera would come
from the next village over and call out (I could hear her in
the distance), “Tanya, put the tea on! Tanya, put the tea on!”
Baba Anisya, the only human being in the village—Marfutka


didn’t count, and Tanya was a criminal—said that Tanya
used to be the head of the health clinic here, practically the
most important person around. Anisya worked for her for
five years, for doing which she lost her pension becausé it
meant she didn’t complete the full twenty-five years at the
collective farm, and then five years sweeping up at the clinic
don’t count, especially with a boss like Tanya. My mom made
a trip once with Anisya to the regional Party headquarters
in Priozersk, but the headquarters had been boarded up long
ago, everything was boarded up, and my mother walked the
twenty-five kilometers home with a frightened Baba Anisya,
who immediately began digging in her garden with renewed
vigor, and choppirig wood, and carrying firewood and twigs
into her house—she was fending off a hungry death, which
is what she’d face if she did nothing, like Marfutka, who was
eighty-five and no longer lit her stove, and even the few pota-
toes she’d managed to drag into her house had frozen during,
the winter. They simply lay there in a wet, rotten pile. Mar-
futka had nibbled out of that pile all winter and now refused
to part with these riches, her only ones, when one time my
mother sent me over with a shovel to clean them out. Mar-
futka refused to open the door, looking out through the win-
dow that was draped in rags and seeing that I was carrying
"a garden spade. Either she ate the potatoes raw, despite her
lack of teeth, or she made a fire for them when ‘no one was
looking—it was impossible to tell. She had no firewood. In
the spring Marfutka, wrapped in layers of greasy shawls,
rags, and blankets, showed up at Anisya’s warm home and

sat there like a mummy, not breathing a word. Anisya didn’t



even try to talk to her, and Marfutka just sat there. I looked
once at her face, which is to say what was visible of her face
under the rags, and saw that it was small and dark, and that
her eyes were like wet holes.

Marfutka survived another winter but no longer went
into the yard—she’d decided, apparently, to die of hunger.
Anisya said simply that, last year, Marfutka still had some
life left in her, but this year she’s done for, her feet don’t look
straight ahead but at each other, the wrong way. One day my
mother took me along, and we planted half a bucket of pota-
toes in Marfutka’s yard, but Marfutka just looked at us and
worried, it was clear, that we were taking over her plot, though
she didn’t have the energy to walk over to us. My mother just
went over to her and handed her some potatoes, but Mar-
futka, thinking her plot was being bought from her for halfa
bucket of potatoes, grew very frightened, and refused.

That evening we all went over to Anisya’s for some goat
milk. Marfutka was there. Anisya said she'd seen us on Mar-
futka’s plot. My mother answered that we'd decided to help
Baba Marfa. Anisya didn’t like it. Marfutka was going to the
next world, she said, she didn’t need help, she’d find her way.
It should be added that we were paying Anisya for the milk in
canned food and soup packets. This couldn’t go on forever,
since the goat made more milk every day, whereas the canned
food was dwindling. We needed to establish a more stable
equivalent, and so directly after the discussion about Mar-
futka, my mother said that our canned foods were running
out, we didn’t have anything to eat ourselves, so we wouldn't

be buying any more milk that day. Clever Anisya grasped the


point at once and answered that she’d bring us a can of milk
the next day and we could talk about it—if we still had pota-
toes, that is. She was angry, apparently, that we were wasting
our potatoes on Marfutka instead of paying her. She didn’t
know how many potatoes we'd invested in Marfutka’s plot
during the hungry spring. Her imagination was working like
a little engine. She must have been calculating that Marfutka
didn’t have long té go and that she’d gather her harvest in
the fall, and was angry in advance that we were the rightful
owners of those planted potatoes. Everything becomes com-

plicated when it’s a matter of surviving in times like these, ,

especially for an old, not particularly strong person in the
" face of a strong young family—my parents were both forty-
_ two then, and I was eighteen.
That night we received a visit from Tanya, who wore
a city coat and yellow rubber boots, and carried a new bag
in her hands. She brought us a little piglet smothered by its
mother, wrapped in a clean rag. Then she wondered if we
were officially registered to live in the village. She pointed
out that many of the houses here had owners, and that the
owners might want to come out and see for themselves what
was happening, say if someone were to write them, and that
all that we beheld was not just riches lying by the roadside.
In conclusion, Tanya reminded us that we’d encroached on
"the plot of our neighbor, and that Marfutka was still alive. As
for the piglet, she offered to sell it to us for money, that is for
paper rubles, and that night my father chopped and pickled

the little pig, which in the rag looked like a little baby. It had

lashes above its eyes and everything.

 


After Tanya left, Anisya came by with a can of goat’s
milk, and over tea we quickly negotiated a new price—one
can of food for three days of milk. With hatred in her voice
Anisya asked why Tanya had come by, and she approved of
our decision to help Marfutka, though she said of her with a
laugh that she smelled bad.

The milk and the piglet were supposed to protect us from
scurvy, and what’s more Anisya was raising a little goat, and
we'd decided to buy it for ten cans of food—but only a little
later, after it had grown some more, since Anisya knew bet-
ter how to raise a goat. We never discussed this with Anisya,
though, and one day she came over, full of insane jealousy at
her old boss Tanya, and proudly showed us that she’d killed
her little goat and wrapped it up for us. Two cans of fish were
the answer she received, and my mom burst into tears. We
tried to eat the meat—we broiled it—but it was inedible, and
my father ended up pickling it again.

My mom and I did manage to buy a baby goat. We walked

ten kilometers to the village of Tarutino, but we did it as if we

"were tourists, as if it were old times. We wore backpacks, and

sang as we walked, and when we got to the village we asked
where we could drink some goat’s milk, and when we bought a
glass of milk from a peasant woman for a bread roll, we made
a show of our affection for the little goats. I started whisper-
ing to my mother, as if I wanted a goat for myself. The peas-
ant woman became very excited, sensing a customer, but my
mother whispered back no, at which point the woman began
speaking very sweetly to me, saying she loved the little goats
like her own children and because of this she'd give them both


to me. To which I quickly replied, “No, I only need one!” We
agreed on a price right away; the woman clearly didn’t know
the state of the ruble and took very little, and even threw in

a handful of salt crystals for the road. She obviously thought
she’d made a good deal, and, in truth, the little goat did begin .

to fade away pretty quickly after the long walk home. It was
Anisya again who got us out of it. She gave the baby goat to
her own big goat, but first she covered it with some mud from
her yard, and the goat took it as one of her own, didn’t kill it.
Anisya beamed with pride.

We now had all the essentials, but my indomitable father,
despite his slight limp, started going out into the forest, and
every day he went farther and farther. He would take his ax,
and some nails, and a saw, and a wheelbarrow—he’d leave
with the sunrise and come back with the night. My mother
and I waded around the garden, somehow or other kept up
my father’s work of collecting window panes, doors, and

glass, and then of course we made the food, cleaned up, .

lugged the water for laundry, sewed, and mended. We'd col-
lect old, forgotten sheepskin coats in the abandoned houses
and then sew something like fur ponchos for the winter, and
also we made mittens and some fur mattresses for the beds.
My father, when he noticed such a mattress one night on his
bed, immediately rolled up all three and carted them away
the next morning. It looked like he was preparing another.
refuge for us,-except this one would be deep in the forest, and
later on it came in very handy. But it also turned out that no
amount of labor and no amount of foresight can save you, no

one and nothing can save you except luck.


In the meantime we lived through the hungriest month,
June, which is when the supplies in a village usually run out.
We shoved chopped dandelions into our mouths, made soup
out of weeds, but for the most part we just gathered grass,
pulled handfuls of it, and carried it, carried it, carried it

_ home in sacks. We didn’t know how to mow it, and anyway it

hadn’t really risen high enough for mowing yet. Finally Ani-
sya gave us a scythe (in exchange for ten sackfuls of grass,
which is not nothing), and Mom and I took turns mowing.
I should repeat: We were far from the world, I missed my

friends and ‘girlfriends, and nothing reached us anymore. . _

My father turned on the radio sometimes, but only rarely,
because he wanted to conserve the batteries. The radio was
full of lies and falsehoods anyway, and we just mowed and
mowed, and our little goat Raya was growing and we needed
to find her.a boy goat. We trod over to the next village again,
but the peasant woman was unfriendly to us now—by this

point everyone knew all about us, but they didn’t know we

had a goat, since Anisya was raising it, so the woman thought
we'd lost Raya, and to hell with us. She wouldn’t give us the
other goat, and we didn’t have any bread now—there wasn’t
any flour, so there wasn’t any bread—and anyway her little
goat had grown, too, and she knew three kilos of fresh meat

would mean a lot of money in this hungry time.-We finally

got her to agree to sell the goat for a kilo of salt and ten bars
of soap. But for us this meant future milk, and we ran home
to get our payment, telling the woman we wanted the goat
alive. “Don’t worry,” she answered, “I’m not bloodying my

hands for you.” That evening we brought the little goat home,


and then began the tough summer days: mowing the grass,
weeding the plot, grooming the potato plants, and all of this
at the same pace as experienced Anisya—we'd arranged
with her that we'd take half the goats’ manure, and some-
how or other we fertilized the plot, but our vegetables still
grew poorly and mostly produced weeds. Baba Anisya, freed
from mowing grass, would tie up the big goat and its little
kindergarten in a place where we could see them, and then
scramble off into the woods for mushrooms and berries,
after which she’d come by our plot and examine the fruits
of our labor. We had to replant the dill, which we'd planted
too deeply; we needed it for pickling cucumbers. The pota-
toes flourished mostly above ground level. My mother and I
read The Guide to Planting and Sowing, and my father finally
finished his work in the forest, and we went to look at his new
home. It turned out to be someone’s hut, which my father had
refurbished by putting in window frames, glass, and doors,
and covering the roof with tar. The house was empty. From
then on at night we carried tables and benches and crates and
buckets and iron pots and pans and our remaining supplies,
and hid everything. My father was digging a basement there,
almost an underground home with a stove, our third. There
were already some young vegetables peeking out of the earth
in his garden. .

My mother and I over the summer had become rough
peasants. Our fingers were hard, with tough thick nails, per-
manently blackened with earth, and most interesting of all

was that at the base of our nails we'd developed some sort

of calluses, I noticed that Anisya had the same thing on her ©

 

fingers, as did Marfutka, who didn’t do anything, and even
Tanya, our lady of leisure, a former nurse, had them too.
Speaking of which, at this point Tanya’s most frequent visitor,
Vera, the shepherdess, hung herself in the forest. She wasn't

' actually a shepherdess anymore—all the sheep had been

eaten long ago—and also she had a secret, which Anisya, who

was very angry with Tanya, now told us: Vera always called

for tea when she was coming into the village, but what Tanya

gave Vera was some kind of medicine, which she couldn’t live

without, and that’s why she hung herself: she had no money

anymore for medicine. Vera left behind a little daughter. Ani-

sya, who had contact with Tarutino, the neighboring village,
told us that the girl was living with her grandmother, but then

it emerged that the grandmother was another Marfutka, only
with a drinking problem, and so the little girl, already half
insane, was brought home the next day by our mother in an

old baby stroller. ‘

My mother always needed more than the rest of us, and
my father was angry because the girl wet her bed and never
said a word, licked her snot, didn’t understand anything, and
cried at night for hours. Pretty soon none of us could live or
sleep for these nighttime screams, and my father went off to
live in the woods. There wasn’t much for it but to go and give
the girl back to her failed grandmother, but just then this
same grandmother, Faina, appeared and, swaying on her feet,
began demanding money for the girl and the stroller. In reply
my mother went inside and brought out Lena, combed, show-
ered, barefoot but in a clean dress. At this point Lena suddenly
threw herself at my mother’s feet, without a word, but like a


grown-up, curling herself up in a ball and putting her arms
around my mother’s bare ankles. Her grandmother began
to cry and left without Lena and without the baby stroller—
apparently, to dié. She swayed on her feet as she walked and
wiped her tears away with her fist—but she swayed not from
drink but from hunger, as I later figured out. She didn’t have
any supplies—after all her daughter Vera hadn’t earned any-
thing for a long time. We ourselves mostly ate stewed grass in
different forms, with plain mushroom soup being the most
common. '

Our little goats had been living for a while now with my
father—it was safer there—and the trail to his house had
almost disappeared, especially as my father never took the
same path twice with his wheelbarrow, as a precaution, plot-
ting for the future. Lena stayed with us. We would pour her
off some milk, feed her berries and our mushroom soups.
Everything became a lot more frightening when we thought
of the coming winter. We had no flour and not a single grain
of wheat; none of the farms in the area was operating—
there hadn’t been any gasoline or spare parts in ages, and the
horses had been eaten even earlier. My father walked through
the abandoned fields, picked up some grain, but others had
been by before him, and he found just a little, enough for
a very small sack. He thought he’d figure out how to grow

wheat under the snow on the little field near his house in the

woods. He asked Anisya when he should plant and sow, and
she promised to tell him. She said shovels were no good, and
as there weren't any plugs to be found anywhere, my father
asked her to draw him a plug on a piece.of paper and began,

 


just like Robinson Crusoe, to bang together some kind of .
contraption. Anisya herself didn’t remember exactly how it

_ worked, even though she’d had to walk behind a cow with a

plug a few times, in the old days, but my father was all aflame
with his new engineering ideas and sat down to reinvent this
particular wheel. He was happy with his new fate and never
pined for the life of the city, where he'd left behind a great
many enemies, including his parents, my grandmother and
grandfather, whom Id seen only when I was very little and
who'd since been buried under the rubble of the arguments
over my mom and my grandfather’s apartment, may it rot,
with its high ceilings and private bathroom and kitchen. We
weren't fated ever to live there, and now my grandparents were
probably dead. We didn’t say anything to anyone when we left
the city, though my father had been planning his escape for
a long time. That’s how we managed to have so many sacks
and boxes to take with us, because all of this stuff was cheap _
and, once upon a time, not subject to rationing, and over the
course of several years my father, a farseeing man, collected it
all. My father was a former athlete, a mountain climber, and:
a geologist. He’d hurt his hip in an accident, and he’d long
ago dreamed of escape, and here the circumstances presented
themselves, and so we did, we left, while the skies were still

‘clear. “It’s a clear day in all of Spain,” my father would joke,

literally every morning that it was sunny out.

The summer was beautiful. Everything was blossoming,
flowering. Our Lena began to talk. She’d run after us into the
forest, not to pick mushrooms but to follow my mother like
she was tied to her, as if it were the main task of her young life.


I taught her how to recognize edible mushrooms and berries,
but it was useless—a little creature in that situation can’t
possibly tear herself away from grown-ups. She is saving her
skin every minute of the day, and so she ran after my mother
everywhere, on her short little legs, with her puffed-out stom-
ach. She called my mother “Nanny”—where she picked up
that word we had no idea; we'd never taught it to her—and
she called me that, too, which was very clever, actually.

” One night we heard a noise outside our door like a cat
meowing and went outside to find a newborn baby wrapped
in an old, greasy coat. My father, who’d grown used to Lena
and sometimes even came during the day to help around the
house, now simply deflated. My mother didn’t like it either
and immediately went over to Anisya to demand who could
have done this—with the child, at night, accompanied by
the quiet Lena, we marched over to Anisya’s. Anisya wasn’t
sleeping; she had also heard the child’s cries and was very
worried. She said that the first refugees had already arrived
in Tarutino, and that soon they'd be coming to our village
too, so we should expect more guests from here on out. The
infant was squealing shrilly and without interruption; he
had a hard, puffed-out stomach. We invited Tanya over in
the morning to have a look, and without even touching him

_ she said he wasn’t going to survive—he had the infant’s dis-
ease. The child suffered, yelled, and we didn’t even have a
nipple for the bottle, much less any food for him. My mother

dripped some water into his dried-out mouth, and he nearly .

choked on it. He looked like he was about four months old.
My mother ran at a good clip to Tarutino, traded a precious

 

bit of salt for a nipple, and returned full of energy, and the
child drank a little bit of water from the bottle. My mother
induced stool with some softening chamomile brew, and we
all, including my father, darted around as fast as we could,
heating the water, giving the child a warm compress. It was
clear to everyone that we needed to leave the house, the plot,
our whole functioning household, or else we'd be destroyed.
But leaving the plot meant starving to death. At the family
conference my father announced that we'd be moving to the

house in the woods and that he’d stay behind for now witha -

rifle and the dog in the shack next door.

That night we set off with the first installment of things.
The boy, whose name was now Nayden, rode atop the cart.
To everyone’s surprise he’d recovered, then began sucking on
the goat’s milk, and now rode wrapped in a sheepskin. Lena
walked alongside the cart, holding onto the ropes. ,

At dawn we reached our new home, at which point my

father immediately made a second run and then a third. He

was like a cat carrying more and more ofhis litter in his teeth,
which is to say all the many possessions he’d acquired, and
now the little hut was smothered in things. That day, when all
of us collapsed from exhaustion, my father set off for guard
duty. At night, on his wheelbarrow, he brought back some

early vegetables from the garden—potatoes, carrots, beets,

and little onions. We laid this all out in the underground
storage he’d created. The same night he set off again, but
limped back almost immediately with an empty wheelbar-

row. Gloomily he announced: “That’s it!” He’d brought a can _

of milk for the boy. It turned out our house had been claimed


by some kind of squad. They'd already posted a guard at the
plot, and taken Anisya’s goat. Anisya had lain in wait for my

father on his escape path with that can of milk. My father was ©

sad, but also he was pleased, since he’d once again managed

to escape, and to escape with his whole family.

Now our only hope lay in my father’s little plot and in the
mushrooms we could find in the forest. Lena stayed in the
house with the boy—we didn’t take her with us to the forest
now but locked her in the house to keep her out of the way.
Strangely enough she sat quietly with the boy and didn’t beat
her fists against the door. Nayden greedily drank the potato
broth, while my mother and I scoured the woods with our
bags and backpacks. We no longer pickled the mushrooms
but just dried them—there was hardly any salt left now.
My father began digging a-well, as the nearest stream was
very far. .

On the fifth day of our immigration we were joined by
Baba Anisya. She came to us with empty hands, with just a
cat on her shoulder. Her eyes looked strange. She sat for a
while on the porch, holding the frightened cat on her lap,
then gathered herself and went off into the woods. The cat
hid under the porch. Soon Anisya came back with a whole

‘ apron’s worth of mushrooms, though among them was a
bright-red poisonous one. She remained sitting on the porch
and didn’t go into the house; we brought her out a portion of

” our poor mushroom soup in a can from the milk she used to
give us. That evening my father took Anisya into the base-
ment, where he’d built our third refuge, and she lay down
‘and rested and the next day began actively scouring the forest



for mushrooms. I'd go through the mushrooms she brought
back, so she wouldn’t poison herself. We'd dry some of them,
and some we'd throw out. One time, coming home from
the woods, we found all our refugees together on the porch.’
Anisya was rocking Nayden in her arms and telling Lena,
choking on her words: “They. went through everything, took
everything .. . They didn’t even look in on Marfutka, but they
took everything of mine. They dragged the goat away by her
rope.” Anisya remained useful for a long time to come, took
our goats out for walks, sat with Nayden and Lena until the
frosts came. Then one day she lay down with the kids in the
warmest place in the house, on the bunk above the stove, and
from then on got up only to use the outhouse.

The winter came and covered up all the paths that might
have led to us. We had mushrooms, berries (dried and boiled),
potatoes from my father’s plot, a whole attic filled with
hay, pickled apples from abandoned gardens in the forest,
even a few cans of pickled cucumbers and tomatoes. On the
little field, under the snow, grew our winter crop of bread. We
had our goats. We had a boy and a girl, for the continuation
of the race, and a cat, who brought us mice from the forest,
and a dog, Red, who didn’t want to eat these mice, but whom
my father would soon count on for hunting rabbits. My
father was afraid to hunt with his rifle. He was even afraid to
chop wood because someone might hear us. He chopped
wood only during the howling snowstorms. We had a
grandmother—the storehouse of the people’s wisdom and
knowledge.

Cold desolate space spread out around us on all sides.


One time my father turned on the radio and tried for

a while to hear what was out there. Everything was silent.

Either the batteries had died, or we really were the last ones
left. My father’s eyes shone: He’d escaped again!

If in fact we’re not alone, then they'll come for us. That

much is clear. But, first of all, my father has a rifle, and we
have skis and a smart dog. Second of all, they won’t come

for a while yet. We’re living and waiting, and out there, we _

know, someone is also living, and waiting, until our grain
grows and our bread grows, and our potatoes, and our new
goats—and that’s when they'll come. And take everything,
including me. Until then they’re being fed by our plot, and
Anisya’s plot, and Tanya’s household. Tanya is long gone, but
Marfutka is still there. When we're like Marfutka, they won’t
touch us either. ‘

But there’s a long way to go until then. And.in the mean-
time, of course, we're not just sitting here. My father and I

have commenced work on our next refuge.

 

THERE ONCE LIVED A WOMAN WHOSE SON HANGED HIMSELF.

Which is to say, when she returned home from the night
shift one morning, her boy was lying on the floor next to an
overturnéd stool underneath a length of thin synthetic rope.

He was unconscious, but his heart still beat faintly, and
so the paramedic who came with the ambulance suggested
that the son wasn’t really trying to hang himself.

Even though there was a note on the table: “Mom, ’m
sorry. I love you.”

And it was only when she’d returned home from the
hospital, having held her son’s hand as they rode in the
ambulance, and then with him into the hospital as he lay on
a stretcher, right up to the doors of the intensive care unit,
where she finally had to let him go—only upon returning
home did she discover that the wool sock in which she kept
her savings was empty. m4

She kept the sock at the bottom of an old suitcase. It had

contained two wedding rings, all her money, and her gold

earrings set with rubies.