I'm a tough, ruthless character, full of mockery towards
everyone, always with a smile on my full, red lips. For
instance, we’d be sitting at Marisha’s. Marisha always has
a get-together at her place on Fridays, every one of us
turns up, or if someone doesn’t it’s either because they’ve
been prevented by family or family circumstances,
or they’ve specifically been banned from coming here
— either by Marisha. herself or by the whole indignant
crowd of us: as Andrei, for instance, was banned for
a long while after giving our Serge a black eye once
when he was drunk, Serge being sacrosanct among us,
our pride and glory. Long ago, for example, he worked
out the aeronautical principle of flying saucers.. He
worked it out right here on the back of a drawing pad
belonging to his genius of a daughter. I saw these
calculations later and cheekily took a look at them, right
in front of everyone. I couldn’t understand a thing, it
was all complete gobbledegook — artificial constructions
from a completely arbitrary point of origin. Quite beyond
me, in other words, and I’m extremely intelligent. If
there’s something I don’t understand then it doesn’t exist.
So Serge must have made a mistake with his point of
origin. And the fact is it’s a long time since he’s read
anything, he relies just on intuition, but you can’t get by
without reading. He also discovered a new principle for
the working of a locomotive with a seventy per cent
Efficiency Factor, once again a completely outlandish
thing. After he’d made this discovery he was brought out


of the woodwork and paraded all over the place, taken
to Professors Fram and Livanovich and shown off at
various symposia. It was Livanovich who came to his
senses first and pointed out his primary source — the
principle had been discovered a hundred years ago and
described for the popular reader in a foot-note on page
such-and-such of a textbook for college students, and
the Efficiency Factor in fact turned out to be no more
than thirty-six per cent, so the result in the end was nil.
All the same there was a terrific hullabaloo, a whole new
department was formed under Livanovich and Serge was
going to be made the head of it without even having
a degree. Not surprisingly, there. was great rejoicing
among the gang. Serge had a thorough re-think of his
whole life, thought over the values he really cared about
and decided it wasn’t those. He decided it would be
better to stay put at the Oceanic and everyone went
into shock again; he’d chucked in a career for the sake
of freedom and liberty. At the Oceanic he was just a
regular junior researcher, with complete freedom to do
as he liked and the prospect any time now of a long-
planned expedition. round the Atlantic, with stop-offs
at Vancouver, Boston, Hong Kong and Montreal. Six
months’ worth of sea and sunshine. So fine, he chose:
freedom; and over there, in his thirty-six per cent
Efficiency department — his own flesh and blood creation
— they’d already acquired staff and appointed some
complete nonentity with a PhD to mun the thing. So that
was it, every place was filled, and they started working
at a nice leisurely pace, waddling about, sitting in the
buffet, taking business trips, and smoke-breaks. They’d
come and consult Serge from time to time; or rather, at
first they used to consult him, they came a couple of
times; Marisha joked that over at the Oceanic they’d lost


track of who was who — a certain Serge, just a junior
researcher, kept on being hauled off right under their
noses for special consultations. But all this came to an
end pretty quickly; the Efficiency people soon settled
into a rut, and after all it wasn’t just a simple matter,
it wasn’t just a matter of principle but of a whole new
technology, entailing the disruption of all existing pro-
duction: there’d be no need for electricity any more,
everything would return to the steam age, the whole
caboodle would be scrapped and wasted. Instead of
progress, in other words, everything, as always, would
just go to blazes. And ail this was to be accomplished
by just one little department consisting of five souls.
Someone we knew, Lenka Marchukaite, got a job as a
lab assistant there, and she’d bring us reassuring news
from time to time, for instance that the guy with the PhD
was about to father a child on the side, and the parents
concerned were concocting a letter denouncing him;
and he’d completely switched off from work, and kept
yelling down the telephone, and there was just the one
office, and no one so much as mentioned Energetics.
Meanwhile they were preparing a draft resolution on
acquiring the use of a workbench in the basement of the
institute for three hours a night for experiments. But
Serge’s freedom-and-liberty option worked out much
worse; the time came to fill in the forms to go on the
expedition, and on the forms he wrote that he wasn’t a
Party member, but at the same time said that he’d been
a member of the Young Communist League when he first
joined the Oceanic. The two statements were compared,
and it emerged that he’d left the YCL off his own bat, he
wasn't even registered as a member of the Oceanic’s YCL
branch, and altogether hadn’t paid his membership dues
for years, and it tured out there was no way this could


be corrected, not with dues or anything else; so the
commission wouldn’t let him go off to the ocean. All this
was related to us by the aforementioned renegade
Andrei, who turned up and was allowed to stay and
drink vodka with everyone else; and he told us all in a
rush that none of us was to say a thing, but he’d agreed
to be an informer just to get on the expedition; however
he’d only be obliged to snitch on board the boat itself,
on dry land he’d be. off duty. And Andrei indeed went
out on the ocean, and in due course returned bearing a
little plastic penis from Japan — the reason it was tiny was
just because he was so short of dollars, but I said he must
have brought it back for his daughter. And Serge sat there
looking mournful, although he’d got his total freedom
the meantime; the whole Oceanic Institute had gone to
the ocean, while he and a small group of lab assistants
were left to take care of the loading and send-off and
the correspondence and reception of the expedition in
Leningrad.

But all this is ancient history now, those days are
over — the days when Serge and Marisha jointly grieved
for Serge and stuck together steadfastly through thick
and thin; all those days of great mutual understanding
are over, and God knows what’s replaced them now;
but every Friday we turn up regular as ever, as if
magnetised by the little house on Stulina Street, and’
drink the whole night through. ‘We’ means Serge and
Marisha, proprietors of the establishment, two rooms in
all. Behind the wall, to the sound of music from the tape
recorder and bursts of laughter, sleeps their daughter
Sonya, brought up a stalwart child, talented, a real young
beauty in her way; now she’s in fact a relative of mine,
can you imagine, but of that more anon. And Marisha’s
my relative too, and Serge himself, that’s one comic



side-effect of our lifestyle together, a straightforward
case of incest, as Tanya put it, when she attended the
marriage between my husband Kolya and Serge’s wife
Marisha — but we'll come to that later.

So anyway at the start this is how it was: Serge and
Marisha, their daughter behind the wall, with me as fifth
wheel and my husband Kolya ~a true, devoted friend of
Serge’s; then there was Andrei-the-snitch, first of all with
his wife Anyuta, later on with various other women, and
thereafter on a permanent basis with Nadya; then Zhora
— half-Jewish on his mother’s side, which no one apart
from me ever so much as mentioned, as if it were some
awful flaw in him; once our idol Marisha decided to
praise the ill-favoured Zhora and said that he had huge
eyes — but what colour were they? Everyone said either
they were yellow or light hazel, but I said they were
Jewish, and everyone for some reason got embarrassed,
and Andrei, my eternal enemy, growled at me. And
Kolya even patted Zhora on the shoulder. But what had
I actually said? I’d spoken the truth. To continue: another
permanent fixture among us was Tanya, a Valkyrie, over
six feet tall, with long, blonde hair, very white teeth,
which she cleaned like a maniac three times a day for
twenty minutes at a stretch (a whole hour a day and

your teeth would be snow-white too) and also very big

grey-blue eyes; she was a beauty, a favourite of Serge’s,
who sometimes used to stroke her hair when he’d really
drunk himself silly, and none of us knew what was going
on; and Marisha would be sitting right there not the
least put out, and I'd be sitting there too and saying to
Lenka Marchukaite: ‘Why don’t you have a dance? Go
and dance with my husband Kolya’ — at which point
everyone would burst into crude laughter, but that was
already at the very twilight of our life together.



Lenka Marchukaite would be there too, a real beauty
of a girl, with a gigantic bust and long, light brown
hair, export material, twenty years old. Lenka at the
beginning behaved like a shady dealer, which indeed
she was — she worked in a record shop. She wormed her
way into Marisha’s confidence, telling her all about her
hard life, then grabbed twenty roubles off her and
walked about with this loan as if it were the most natural
thing in the world; then she disappeared, returned some
time later with four front teeth missing, gave back the
twenty roubles (‘You see?’ said Marisha triumphantly)
and announced that she’d been in hospital where they’d
passed sentence on her, telling her she could never
have children. Marisha loved her all the more after that;
Lenka all but slept at their place; but of course she
was a different proposition now without her teeth, no .
longer export material. With Serge’s help Lenka got a job
as a lab assistant in his thirty-six per cent department,
acquired some new teeth, got married to a Jewish dissi-
dent kid called Oleg, who turned out to be the son of
the famous beautician Marie Lazarevna; and for a while
Lenka acted as our spy in this wealthy family, telling us
with great amusement what an amazing bedroom Marie
had, what incredible wardrobes, each worth enough
dollars to last you a lifetime, and what was the latest
thing Marie had given her. Marie spoiled Lenka and said
that her skin was a real natural treasure. Lenka indeed
had unusually delicate natural skin; her white flesh and
red blood made a quite fantastic combination at any hour
of the day, no matter whether at sunset or dawn; and her
lips were truly as red as blood. All children of course
have skin like this — take my Alyosha, for example. But
Lenka treated herself with contempt; she ran from one
shady dive to the next like a cheap little minx, setting no



store by herself at all, and finally announced that her
Oleg was setting off to America, via Vienna, with his
entire family, and she wasn’t going — and she didn’t
go, she divorced Oleg, and it became her trademark,
whenever she came to the house, to sit down straight
away in one or other of the men’s laps; she was in her
element, while our poor lads, be it my Kolya or that
snitch Andrei, would just grin crookedly by way of
response. Serge was the only one she wouldn't risk it
with; Serge was untouchable, and anyway there was
Marisha right alongside, and Lenka absolutely adored
Marisha and wouldn’t have dreamt of making fun of her
as she made fun of all the rest of us, including Andrei-
the-snitch’s young wife, who flushed and went out to the
kitchen when Lenka, without meaning a thing, plonked
herself down in Andrei’s lap. This wife of his, Nadya,
‘was even younger than Lenka, she can’t have been more
than eighteen, and you could have taken her for fifteen
— a skinny, delicate, red-headed, depraved looking
schoolgirl, the likes of which only Andrei could have
latched onto — Andrei who was totally impotent and
didn’t require a thing, as everyone had long since found
out thanks to his garrulous official wife Anyuta.
Depraved this Nadya may well have been, but she got
herself a husband and became a Russian baba to end
them all: she’d open those little jaws of hers, the little
nymphet, and start crooning away about what dish she’d
just made and what they’d just bought and what Andrei
had drunk and how she wouldn’t allow him to drink any
more. The only thing that remained of her former vice
and depravity was her unhinged eye, which whenever
she made certain awkward movements would slip out
of its orbit and slither down her cheek like a soft-boiled
egg. It must have been a dreadful sight to behold, but



Andrei got used to it, and with her holding the eye in
the palm of her hand he'd take her off to hospital, where
they got it fixed; on these nights, I imagine, Andrei rose
to the occasion. And with his previous wife, Anyuta,
Andrei just lived for the thrilling moments when she had
her attacks and he’d have to take her in the ambulance,
wrapped in a blanket, from hospital to hospital, until it
was finally established that she had a so-called toxic
womb. The toxicity of Anyuta’s womb made quite an
impact in our circle, and both Anyuta and Andrei seemed
stamped with the mark of doom. All the rest of us already
had children: Zhora had three, I had my Alyosha, and I
only had to be absent a couple of weeks from Serge and
Marisha’s for news to circulate through the ranks that
I'd been taken off to the maternity hospital: that was
their way of poking fun at my figure. Tanya had a son,
famous for the fact that when he was very little he used
to crawl up on his mother and suck alternately from each
breast; that was how they amused themselves. Andrei
and Anyuta weren’t able to have children, and we felt
sorry for them, for there’s something absurd about not
having children around, and among us it just wasn’t
done; the whole effect consisted in having children and
messing about with puddings and mash and kinder-
gartens, and then on Friday nights feeling human again
and going on a bender at full throttle, to the point where
the police were sometimes even called in by one or other
of the neighbours in Stulina Street. Anyuta and Andrei
wore this air of doom about them until one fine day,
completely out of the blue, Anyuta suddenly gave birth
to a daughter, virtually without changing her appearance
at all! There was great rejoicing all round; on the night
of the birth Andrei brought two bottles of vodka round
to Serge and summoned my Kolya to come over, and



they spent the night drinking; and Andrei said he’d call
his daughter Marisha in honour of Marisha, and Marisha
was rather upset by this homage. But there was nothing
to be done, she couldn’t forbid them, and so that parasite
Andrei called his daughter Marisha. But that was the last
of their rejoicing and their family romance, and Andrei,
one assumes, must thenceforth have abandoned his
conjugal duties, while Anyuta, on the contrary, became
aware of her own ordinariness: she’d become like any
other woman, free of attacks, and in consequence she
began, during her year’s maternity leave, to invite home
a whole string of new friends, and at this point Andrei
set sail on the ocean in his capacity as snitch, and upon
his return found a veritable swarm of friends at his house,
attracted, no doubt, by the widowed state of Anyuta’s
formally toxic womb. Andrei then discovered a new
romance in the role of abandoned husband, and began
romantically bringing selected girlfriends to Serge and
Marisha’s, and Lenka Marchukaite would brazenly sit
in his lap, as if setting her seal on his child-bearing organs,
now they were exhausted and done with their business.
That was just a little joke and taunt of hers.

One time she sat in my Kolya’s lap too, kind, skinny
Kolya, who was literally crushed, both physically and
morally, by the sheer weight of Lenka; he hadn’t antici-
pated this turn of events and simply kept his hands as
far away as possible and kept exchanging glances with
Marisha; but Marisha turned away sharply and got into
conversation with Zhora; and that was when I began to
_see what was going on. I realised then that Lenka had
blundered, and said:

‘Lenka, you’ve blundered. Marisha’s feeling jealous
over my husband.’

Lenka, quite unconcerned, just pulled a face and



carried on sitting on Kolya’s knees, Kolya meanwhile
drooping like a plucked weed. That, I think was the start
of Marisha’s cooling-off towards Lenka, which led in due
course to Lenka’s gradual disappearance from the scene,
especially when the latter eventually gave birth to a still-
born child; but more of that anon. At that particular
moment everyone responded with an exaggerated surge
of activity; Tanya clinked glasses with Serge, Zhora
topped up everyone's glasses and served fresh helpings
to the overloaded Kolya and ‘the chilly Marisha; and
Andrei gallantly struck up a conversation with his silly
little Nadya, who kept triumphantly glancing at me, the
wife of the crushed husband.

Lenka never risked sitting on Zhora’s lap, however;
that would have been too dangerous an undertaking,
since Zhora exhibited, like many small men, a state of
permanent sexual arousal, and he adored the lot of them
~ Marisha, Tanya, even Lenka. Lenka, a completely cold
creature, risked inciting Zhora to attempted rape right
there in front of everyone, as had already happened on
one occasion with a lady-friend of Andrei’s who'd
pretended to terrific passion when dancing with Zhora;
but that was something you couldn’t permit yourself with
him, and when the music was over Zhora, seemingly
beside himself, simply grabbed hold of the strapping
great lass by the armpits and dragged her into the next
room, which as everyone knew was empty, Marisha
and Serge’s daughter having been sent that night to stay
with her grandmother. Zhora succeeded in dumping the
half-crazed lady on Sonya’s little bed, but at this point
Serge and Andrei, laughing despite themselves, entered
and dragged Zhora away, while the alarmed lady
adjusted her dress, which had ridden up amidst the fray.
This incident provoked dreadful hilarity the whole night



long; but in fact everyone, apart from the lady herself, a
stranger to our circle, knew that the whole thing was just
a game; Zhora had been playing the bon viveur and
libertine ever since student days, when in fact he sat up
nights writing his wife’s doctoral dissertation and got
up when needed to attend to his three children, and it
was only on Fridays that he’d put on his lionskin and go
a-courting the whole night long.

But the cautious Lenka Marchukaite, who likewise
played her sexual games with amazing sang froid,
wouldn't risk inciting Zhora to perform his usual role;
two performances at once would have been too much,
it would have forced them to some kind of conclusion:
Lenka would have seated herself, Zhora would straight
away have startecl pawing her and what have you, and
Lenka didn’t really like all that, just as Zhora, when all
was said and clone, didn’t really care for it either.
However, Lenk:, Marchukaite came and went, just as
Marisha wantec; one moment she was there and the
next she’d disa »peared, and when I mention her name
out loud now in front of everyone it sounds like the
usual crass taclessness on my part.

Somehow everything’s got muddled up in my memory
as a result of recent events in my life, specifically the fact
that I’ve started going blind. Did ten years pass with
those Friday gatherings, or was it fifteen? Various great
events rolled by — the Czech, the Polish, the Chinese, the
Romanian, or was it the Yugoslav events, and there
were various trials, and then trials of the people who’d
protested against the first trials, and then trials of the
people who'd collected money to help the families of
those sent to the camps —-all these happenings flew
by in the meantime. Sometimes stray birds from other,



adjacent fields of human activity would fly in; thus, for
example, a certain district policeman took to dropping
in on our Fridays, a stubborn, arrogant fellow called
Valera, a sambo-wrestler. The door to the apartment was
left open on Fridays, and it was just three steps up from
the pavement to the door; he came the first time and
asked for everyone’s documents, in connection with a
complaint from the residents of the house opposite on
Stulina Street, concerning excessive noise after eleven
o’clock at night and continuing right up to five in
the morning. Valera conscientiously checked everyone’s
documents, or rather, checked who had their documents,
because none of our lads turned out to have their
passports on them. He didn’t check the girls, and sub-
sequently this led us to suspect that Valera was looking
for someone in particular. All the following week
everyone kept ringing each other up in a state of great
agitation and nerves; we were all very troubled and
frightened, feverishly excited. For a real danger had
suddenly entered our quiet little abode, where the only
noise usually was the music from the tape recorder;
because of Valera and his document inspection, we’d
been flung right into the centre of events. By the
following Friday we were all dead certain that Valera was
searching for a Russo-American, Levka, who’d been
living a whole year in the country with an expired
visa, wandering from haunt to haunt, from one private
apartment to another — not because he didn’t want to go
back to the States, but simply because he’d outstayed his
visa, which, he’d been told, could land him a term in jail
according to our laws; so he’d started hiding out, and
everyone stowed him away with great excitement and
laughter, but I'd never seen him at Marisha’s place,
though Levka-the-American sometimes stayed the night



on the floor in the apartment of Marisha’s next-door
neighbours in the house, a rather shady bunch consisting
of two girls, eternal students with no permanent Moscow
residence permit, and assorted tribes of cohabitees;
and once, by chance, the students told us, Levka had
dropped by to borrow a rouble and ended up deflower-
ing a certain Nina, a second-year journalism student and
a minister’s daughter; Nina lost her cherry and woke up
covered in blood, and in a panic dragged the mattress
into the kitchen to wash it out, since there was no bath-
room in the apartment. Levka-the-American vanished
without trace, and Nina bore him no grudge and now,
apparently, had started in turn wandering from one low
dive to, another, searching for Levka to whom, in the
Russian sense of the term, she had given her all. Ever
since then, appirently, Levka had stopped spending
the night on Stulina Street, and so, in this sense, Valera’s
visits were quite fruitless.

However, hy: turned up again at five past eleven
— turned up to turn off the tape recorder, and the tape
recorder was culy turned off and we sat and drank in
silence, and Valera, for purposes quite unclear to us,
sat there as well; perhaps he’d decided nonetheless just
to sit it out and wait for Levka, or maybe he absolutely
had to get rid of our harmless little crowd once and
for all; at any rate he sat there and wouldn’t go away.
Marisha, who’d convinced us all, with her passionate
argument, that everyone’s interesting in their way (she
always had various stray folk, picked up at railway
stations, staying the night, and once she had a woman
staying a whole month with her paralysed year-old
daughter; the woman had come for an appointment
at the Paediatrics Institute, strictly on a no-treatment,
consultation-only basis) — Marisha it was who first



found the right key and began to treat Valera as an
unfortunate, lonely fellow; and after all no stranger was

‘ denied a welcome in this house; it was simply unusual

for someone to try and foist themselves on us like that.
Marisha, and then Serge, began animatedly conversing
with Valera on various themes; they gave him a glass
of wine, offered him black bread and cheese — the only
things on the table — and Valera didn’t evade any of
their questions and didn’t once seem to feel wounded
in his self-esteem. So, for instance, Serge asked him:

‘Did you join the police just so as to get a residence
permit, then?’

‘No, I had a permit already,’ Valera answered.

‘So what did you do it for?’

‘Mine’s a difficult district,’ Valera answered, ‘and I’m
a sambo-wrestler, though because of a shoulder injury
I didn’t make it to second grade back in the army. In
sambo if your arm gets twisted you’re meant to give
some sort of sound signal.’

‘What d’you mean, sound signal?’ I asked.

‘Well if you'll excuse the expression you’re meant at
least to cough or fart so they don’t break your arm.’

I immediately asked how it was possible to fart to
order.

Valera said that he hadn’t managed to give a sound
signal in time and that his arm had been wrenched out
of joint at the shoulder, but at any rate he’d got to third
grade. Then, without pausing for breath, he set out his
point or view on the existing state of affairs in the
country and on the fact that everything was going to
change and everything would be like it was in Stalin’s
day and in Stalin’s day there was law and order. :

In short, the whole of that evening was spent on a
sociological investigation of Valera’s type, and in the



end, perhaps because he was really quite shrewd, or
because we had all taken a passive role, but at any
rate instead of our usual questionnaire, which we’d
tried on more than one occasion with various stray
creatures, such as the prostitutes brought in by Andrei
or the music lovers that sometimes stopped under our
window on. quiet Stulina Street and engaged us in
conversation over the window sill and finally, by the
same route, climbed into the room and were then
obliged to answer a whole series of questions — on this
occasion things proceeded quite differently, and Valera,
without touching concretely on any of his professional
duties, lectured us loudly for an entire hour on how
things were under Stalin, and nobody tried particularly
to contradict him; everyone was afraid, I suppose, that
this was a provovation, they were nervous of express-
ing their views ir front of a representative of authority,
and in any case it wasn’t the done thing among us to
go expressing cur views, we thought it puerile to go
yelling about oi r views on things, let alone doing so in
front of that iciot Valera, a slippery character and a
dark horse who’d come and sat down, at our humble
round table, ir. Marisha and Serge’s meagre room, for
purposes that were quite unclear.

At midnight all of us, feeling thoroughly humiliated,
got up and left — all except Valera. Perhaps Valera had
nowhere else to spend his night on duty, or maybe he’d
been given some clear-cut task, but at any rate he sat
there at Marisha and Serge’s until morning, and Serge
subsequently ventured the opinion — in due course
relayed to the masses via Marisha over the telephone
— that Valera was the most interesting fellow he’d come
across over the last four years; but this was no more
than defensive formula on Serge’s part. Serge had taken


Valera entirely on himself, as Marisha had gone and
slept on the floor in Sonya’s room, while Serge, as the
man of the house, stayed and drank tea with Valera, a
special tea brewed from St. John’s wort; they drank a
whole teapotful of this diuretic, and Valera, moreover,
didn’t once go to the lavatory and left only when his
night-duty was over. Evidently Valera hadn’t wanted to
leave his post for a second and therefore accomplished
a veritable feat of urine-retention. Serge, for his part,
didn’t leave the room either, fearing a search in his
absence.

Be that as it may, that Friday was a Friday of torments,
and we all felt like fish out of water. Lenka Marchukaite
didn’t once sit in anyone’s lap, let alone Valera’s,
and Zhora didn’t once yell ‘virgins!’ through the window
to passing schoolgirls, and only I kept asking how
sambo-wrestlers learn to fart: was it by sheer force of
will or through eating some special diet? This theme
kept me going the whole evening, since precisely this
was the only theme Valera kept avoiding. He’d knit his
brows and somehow side-step the subject, didn’t once
pronounce the word ‘fart’ out loud again and took a great
dislike to me, as everyone does at first glance and for
evermore. But there was no getting out of it; the word
in question does not, it would seem, appear in the
unpublished list of words that can earn you fifteen days’
imprisonment if spoken out loud in a public place, and
in any case it was Valera who'd gone and uttered it in
the first place! So I alone kept sticking my oar in, inter-
rupting the intellectual conversation which Serge had
set going with a few leading questions, still hoping to
elevate himself by playing the role of mocking observer
of life’s strange phenomena, Valera serving potentially as
one such phenomenon. But Valera couldn’t care less



about Serge’s patronising questions, and forged straight
ahead, saying a number of things that could well have
endangered his professional position, regarding the fact
that they understood what’s what in the army and you
lot won’t be monkeying round much longer and a big
boss will come along and set things to rights.

‘But do tell me,’ I interrupted, ‘is it in the army that
they teach you to fart? But you failed to learn, I see,
because you weren’t able to fart in time and didn’t get
your second grade.’

“You should see the guys we've got in the army, the
techno-men,’ Valera went on, ‘they've got all the know-
how they need, all the technology at their fingertips.
They know what’s what, those guys, they’ve got their
heads screwed on “he right way.’

Serge asked, for example, whether Valera often did
night-duty and where was the room he’d been given.
Marisha asked, ‘n her usual kindly, sympathetic tone
whether Valera was married and had children. Tanya,
our beautiful \alkyrie, just snorted away quietly to
herself and mustered a running commentary, hunched
over her glass, on Valera’s most scintillating statements,
always addressing herself to Zhora, as if to support him
in this difficult situation where he, a half-Jew, but pure
Jewish in appearance, had had to present his Passport
to Valera (he was the only one who had his passport
on him on that occasion) and Valera had read it out
loud: Georgy (Zhora) Aleksandrovich Perevoshchikov,
Russian!

Yes, on this second visit of his Valera again asked for
people's passports and again checked Serge’s and again
got nothing from Andrei or Kolya or from an outsider
who'd by chance wandered in on this dangerous party
— an Orthodox Christian called Zilberman who seldom


came to Moscow; he was terribly scared, and instead
of his passport presented his old student card, which he
always used to get reduced train fares. Valera took
Zilberman’s card off him, simply put it in his pocket,
and Zilberman disappeared, asking loudly where the
toilet was. Valera, though he’d threatened at first to take
Zilberman along with him for proper identification,
didn’t make a move to follow him, and we all stood
there suffering at the thought of how terrified and shaky
poor Zilberman would be, having, on top of everything
else, been caught on the hook now. But apparently
Valera had no use for Zilberman.

I was interested to see how that snitch Andrei
would comport himself, but Andrei’s behaviour was also
cautious and reserved. As soon as the tape-recorder was
tumed off, Andrei lost the chance of dancing with whom-
ever he pleased; he was a capricious dancer, sometimes
didn’t dance at all, and his wife Nadya, who'd tumed
herself into such a thoroughgoing Russian baba, despite
her depraved adolescent look, sat like a statue through-
out, belatedly feeling jealous; so there it was, Andrei
just sat with his Nadya. Nadya’s father was a colonel on
the up-and-up, and all Valera’s speeches, as a man of
junior rank, Nadya absorbed only through the prism of
the fact that, when Serge asked him what rank had in
fact been conferred on him, Valera said that, albeit
against many people’s wishes, he’d immediately been
made a lieutenant. Nadya, alone of all of us, digested
the whole situation immediately, started wandering
about, took Andrei off to ring up a certain Ira and then
took him away altogether, and Valera didn’t react at all.
Quite possibly even if all of us had left he would have
stayed just the same, this was his ‘target’; or maybe not,
after ail.



Kolya and I on this occasion didn’t waste money on
a taxi, but managed to catch a bus from the metro
station and arrived home at a human hour, to discover
Alyosha still up at half past one in the morning, dozing
in front of the television, whose screen was ablaze to
no purpose. This was the first time we’d returned home
at night — instead of in the morning — from one of our
Fridays, and we saw that in his own way Alyosha also
celebrated this night; but when I was putting him to
bed he said that he was afraid to sleep alone and afraid
to turn out the light. And indeed every light in the place
was on, though Alyosha didn’t use to be afraid; of
course he used to have his grandfather there, but his
grandfather, my father, had died not long before, and
my mother had died three months before that; in the
course of a single winter I’d lost both my parents;
moreover my mother had died of the same kidney
disease which, during the last while, had shown signs
of developing in me as well, and which begins with
blindness. Be that as it may, I discovered that Alyosha
was afraid to go to sleep when there was nobody
home. Obviously the shades of his grandparents still
haunted him; my father and mother had raised him,
spoiled him and generally brought him up, and now
Alyosha would be totally alone, bearing in mind that
I too was going to die soon, and my kind husband
Kolya, always so quiet in company, who moped about
at home or quite improperly started yelling at Alyosha
whenever the boy ate with us — Kolya, it seemed, was
planning to leave me, and planning to leave me for
none other than Marisha.

As I say, many years flew by above that peaceful
little Friday nest of ours; Andrei, from the golden-haired
Paris he was in his youth, became by tums a father, an


abandoned husband, a snitch on board an expedi-
tionary boat, then a lawful spouse again and the owner
of a fine apartment, bought by the colonel for his little
Nadya, and finally an alcoholic; he still loved Marisha
alone, as he had done all his life, ever since student
days, and Marisha knew this and valued it; and all the
other ladies in his life were simply a replacement for
her. And the crowning item on Andrei’s agenda were
his dances with Marisha, one or two sacred dances
a year.

Zhora had also grown up, turning from a bumptious
student, full of pranks, into a modest, impoverished,
senior scientist, attired in the cheapest shirts and dark
grey trousers, a father of three, a budding professor and
future prize-winner with no pretensions at all; but
lodged in the very core of him there’d always been just
that one thing: his love for Marisha, who’d always
loved Serge and nobody else.

My Kolya, too, loved and worshipped Marisha; right
from the start, in their first year at college, they'd all
gone beserk about Marisha, and the game had gone on
right up to this moment, when Serge, to whose lot the
lovely Marisha had fallen, and who’d gone on living
with her all those years, suddenly went and found
himself a new beloved, a woman he’d known from
way back in high school; and one night, on New Year’s
Eve, when we'd all been drinking and were playing
charades, Serge said ‘I'm going to go and ring my
beloved’ — and we were all thunderstruck, for if the
men all loved Marisha and regarded Serge as the only
human amongst us, we all loved Marisha and Serge
above all; Serge’s name was on everyone's lips,
although he himself said little — it was Marisha who had
elevated him so, Marisha who worshipped him on her



knees, worshipped him as her fellow-fighter in life; she
revered his every word and gesture, because once
upon a time, way back in their first year, when Serge
had fallen in love with her along with everyone else
and proposed to her and slept with her, she’d gone and
left him, given in to her erotic inclinations and rented
a room with a certain Jean, renouncing her first and
pure love for Serge; and then Jean had abandoned her,
and she herself, on her own initiative, came back to
Serge and proposed to him herself, once and for all
giving up the notion of getting erotic love on the side;
and they got married, and Marisha would sometimes
say with a kind of holy radiance that Serge was her
crystal goblet. To which I’'d say these days that you
should never try sleeping with a crystal goblet, it just
won't work, or if it does work you'll get yourself cut in
pieces.

But in those days our whole lives revolved around
walking holidays and camp fires, we drank dry wine
and scoffed at everything and didn’t touch on anything
to do with sex, because we were still too young and
didn’t know what awaited us in the future; the only
thing from the sexual arena that bothered the company
at all was that I had a white bathing suit which turned
out to be completely see-through, and everyone did
their best to make fun of me; this was when we were
all living in tents by the seaside, and something of the
sexual sphere obtruded here too in the sense that
Zhora complained of there being no lavatory; the shit
just wouldn’t float away in the sea. And this same
Zhora kept shouting as well that what the other female
tourists needed was a first class abortionist; Andrei,
meanwhile, kept romantically going to dances with
girls from the TB clinic four miles away in the town of


 

 

Simeiz, and Serge stubbomly carried on fishing with the
help of some underwater fishing tackle, choosing to
prove his manhood this way, and at nights I kept
listening to the regular thump thump emanating from
their tent; but her whole life long Marisha stayed a
restless creature with fire in her eyes, and this spoke ill
of Serge’s abilities, and the boys were all on their marks
and raring to go, ready, it seemed, collectively to fill in
the gaps for her, but their path was blocked. And
together with her inaccessibility, this sexual fire that
consumed Marisha, our high priestess of love, was
really the thing that allowed our circle to stay together
so long, because other people’s love is infectious, it’s a
proven fact. We girls loved Serge and loved Marisha at
the same time, we suffered on her behalf and, like her,
were torn to bits, but in our own way — on the one
hand, we loved Serge and dreamt of replacing Marisha,;
on the other we couldn’t possibly have done it, out of
sympathy for Marisha, out of love and pity for her. In
short, everything was filled to the brim with this in-
divisible love of Marisha and Serge, the unrealisability
of their love; everyone was enthralled by it, and it
drove Serge mad — he being the only one who had full
rights in the matter. Once the ulcer burst, although not
entirely, when during some harmless sexual chit-chat
round the table — the chit-chat of pure people who for
that very reason can talk about whatever they like — the
conversation turned to a book by a Polish author on
sexopathology. This was something new for our circle,
for until then all of us had lived as if his or her case
were completely unique, not something to examine
ourselves or reveal to others. But the new wave of
enlightenment touched our little circle too, and I said:

‘I’ve been told about this book Sexopathology, where



apparently the sexual act is divided into various differ-
ent stages; apparently, Serge, the husband and wife have
to arouse one another first, and what you have to do to
begin with, I gather, is stroke your partner’s earlobe!
Apparently the earlobe’s an erogenous zone!’

Everyone froze, and Serge said straight out that he
took an extremely negative view of me; he began to
splutter and shout, but what did I care, I sat there as if
made of stone, for I’d clearly hit the nail on the head.

But this was before Serge found the love of his life,
the girl next door from the street of his childhood;
before he met the erotic dream of his youth, who was
now — as various well-informed people reported — a
plump brunette; and before the policeman Valera began
regularly coming to the apartment on Stulina Street and
fighting his battle for the right to silence, from eleven at
night through till seven in the morning; and it took
place, too, before I started gradually discovering that I
was going blind, let alone discovered that Marisha was
jealous of Lenka Marchukaite over my Kolya.

Thus in the twinkling of an eye all the knots came
undone: Serge stopped spending his nights at home;
the Fridays at their place faded out and a new series
was instituted in a safer place, in the room of the
Valkyrie Tanya, albeit in the presence of her adolescent
son, who guarded his mother jealously from everyone.
Later the adolescent was put in isolation, sent off to
Stulina Street to spend Fridays with the girl Sonya,
apropos of which I remarked that it was useful for
children to sleep with one another, but they paid no
attention to me, as always, even though I'd spoken the
truth.

But meanwhile a great wave. of tumultuous events
rolled by in the intervals between our Fridays: Marisha’s


father died after paying them a visit at Stulina Street; on
that very evening, on that very street, he was run over
by a car in an unauthorised place, and moreover, as the
post-mortem revealed, in a state of inebriation, since
before setting off home he’d got thoroughly drunk
with Serge. Everything was tangled up in this horribly
unfortunate incident: the fact that Marisha’s father had
wanted to have a man-to-man talk with Serge about
why he was leaving Marisha, and the fact that this
conversation took place in the evening, when Sonya
had not yet gone to bed; and Marisha and Serge were
concealing from Sonya the fact that Serge wasn’t sleep-
ing at home; Serge would tenderly put Sonya to bed
and only afterwards set off to his other woman, and in
the morning in any case Sonya woke up only just in
time for school, when Serge was already on his way to
work; and after work, from six until nine, Serge would
be on duty again with his daughter, they’d work on her
music and make up stories together; and it was during
this balmy interval that Marisha’s distressed father
struck the household, he himself, incidentally, having
lived for many years now with another family, and
having experienced his fair share of sorrow and had a
further son, now twenty years old. Marisha’s father
drank and talked a great deal, saying God knows what
to no purpose whatsoever, and for no purpose what-
soever was run over by a car on the doorstep of his
daughter’s house right there on Stulina Street, at the
quiet hour of 9.30 in the evening.

During the same period my mother quietly burned
out, dwindling from over twelve stone to less than five,
and she died with great bravery, kept cheering every-
one else up, including me; and right at the end the
doctors took it upon themselves to find a non-existent


abscess in her, opened it up, accidentally sewed her
intestine to her peritoneum and left her to die with an
open wound the size of a fist, and when she was rolled
out to us dead, disembowelled and sewn up any old
how right up to her chin with a great hole in her belly,
I couldn’t believe such things could befall a human
being, and for a moment imagined this wasn’t my
mother, and that my mother must be somewhere else.
Kolya took no part in all these goings on; the two of
us had formally separated five years before, only
neither of us had paid for the divorce, both having
settled down to simple coexistence, like a husband and
wife who make no claims on each other, or just live
together like everyone else; but at this point it turned
out that he’d gone and paid for the divorce after all,
and after the funeral he suggested to me in all serious-
ness that I should pay too, and I paid. Then my father,
fatally struck down by grief, passed away too, dying of
a heart attack, easily and happily, in his sleep: one
night, getting up to tuck Alyosha in, I simply noticed
my father wasn’t breathing; so I went back to bed, lay
there until morning, took Alyosha to school, and then
took my father to the hospital morgue.

But all this took place in the intervals between
Fridays; I missed a few of them, and then a month later
it was Easter, and once again I invited everyone to come
round to our place as they did every year. Once a year,
at Easter, we all gathered at my and Kolya’s place, and
with Mum and Dad’s help I made lots of food, and then
my parents took Alyosha off with them to our dacha in
the country, an hour and a half’s ride out of town, to
burn all the dead leaves, put the little house in order
and plant this and that — and there, in the unheated hut,
the three of them slept, allowing my guests the chance


to eat, drink and be merry the whole night long. And it
was all just the same on this occasion; and in order that
it should all be just the same, I told Alyosha that he was
to go alone to the dacha and spend the night there.
There was no other solution, he was already grown up,
seven years old, he knew the way there perfectly well,
and in addition I'd warned him that he was on no
account to come back and ring the doorbell. And so he
set off, a solitary waif. That Sunday moming he and
I had visited the graves of his grandfather and grand-
mother; it was the first time he’d been to a cemetery,
and he carted the water for me to and fro in the pail,
and we planted daisies round the graves. He was
supposed to embark on a new life from that point on;
we ate a hasty meal there, bread, sausage, cheese and
tea — taken from the supplies for out festive meal that
night — and Alyosha then set off, without pausing to rest,
for the next leg of the journey to the dacha, while I,
back home, set about preparing the dough for the
cabbage pies. My resources by this time were pretty
slender; a cabbage pie, a pie made with mother’s jam,
potato salad, eggs with onion, grated beetroot with
mayonnaise, a bit of cheese and sausage — they'd
gobble it all up no matter what. And a bottle of vodka.
The fact was I didn’t earn much, and there was no point
expecting anything much from Kolya, he’d almost
totally moved out to live with his parents by this time,
and on the rare occasions that he visited he kept shout-
ing at Alyosha for eating all wrong and hiccoughing
all wrong and dropping crumbs on the floor, and finally
he yelled that the boy spent the whole time watching
television and God knows what he’d grow up to be, he
didn’t read, didn’t draw. This helpless cry was a cry of
jealousy in relation to Sonya, who sang, composed


music, attended a prestigious music school where there
were three hundred applicants for every place, had
been a bookworm from the age of two and wrote
poetry and stories herself. In the final analysis Kolya
loved Alyosha, but he would have loved him a great
deal more if the child had been talented and good-
looking, brilliant at school and strong amongst his
schoolfellows. Then Kolya would have loved him a
great deal more, but as it was he saw himself in the boy
and it made him mad, and especially mad when
Alyosha was eating. Alyosha had bad teeth, at the age of
seven they hadn’t grown properly at the front, and
Alyosha hadn’t yet adapted to his orphaned state since
the death of his grandparents, and he ate distractedly,
swallowing great lumps without chewing properly,
dropping crumbs and bits and pieces all over his
trousers and endlessly spilling things; and to cap it all
he’d started wetting his bed. I think Kolya popped like
a cork straight out of our family nest just in order not to
have to see his urine-soaked son, trembling in his wet
pants on his skinny little legs. When Kolya, woken by
Alyosha’s weeping, first came upon this disgrace, he
went for Alyosha, slapping him straight on the cheek,
and Alyosha swiftly ran back to his sodden, sour-
smelling bed, but he didn’t cry much, he even felt
relieved at having been punished. I just smiled ironi-
cally, left the room and set off to work, leaving them to
sort out the mess between them. On that day I was due
to have my eyes examined, they were already showing
signs of the hereditary disease my mother had died
from. Or rather, the doctor hadn’t given me a final
diagnosis, but the drops she prescribed were the same
as those prescribed for my mother, and I was due to
undergo the same tests. I was in for it now, that was


how things stood, and what could I care if Alyosha wet
the bed or Kolya hit him? New horizons had opened out
before me. I won’t say what sort of horizons, but I
Started to take measures. Kolya left. I returned home
and found that Kolya’s wearable items had disappeared
— everything else, to do him justice, he had graciously
left me. And now it was Easter and I baked the pies and
pulled out the table, covered it with a tablecloth and set
out the plates and glasses and salads, the sausage and
cheese and bread; there were even a few apples that a
friend of my mother’s had given me, she’d brought a
whole bag of them, a rare find in springtime, along with
some painted eggs, and I took a few along to the ceme-
tery, scattered some food for the birds on the little
planks, and Alyosha and I ate a bit too. There were
lots of people around, I remember, standing around
the other fenced-in graves, chatting animatedly, drink-
ing and having a snack in the fresh air; we've still kept
up this tradition of Easter picnics in graveyards; they
make you feel that everything, in the end, has worked
out all right, the deceased are lying there in peace, and
people come and drink to them, and. the graves are
tended, and the air‘is fresh, and there are birds about
and no one and nothing has been forgotten; and it will
be just the same for every one of us, everything will
pass and come to an end just as peacefully and happily,
with paper flowers and photographs in ceramic frames,
and birdies in the air and painted eggs lying right there
on the earth. Alyosha, I think, overcame his fear; he
grew gradually bolder, planting a bed of daisies with me
in the earth; the soil there is clean and sandy; and
I'd had my parents cremated, so there were just little
boxes of ash buried there, nothing too dreadful; and
everything was behind us now, and Alyosha ran to and


fro watering the bed, and then we went and washed our
hands and ate our eggs, bread and apples, and scattered
and crumbled up the rest, as did the numerous visitors
to other, neighbouring graves. And on our way home in
the bus and on the metro everyone was tipsy but
friendly and full of goodwill, as if they’d glanced in at
the world beyond the grave and found fresh air there
and plastic flowers, and they’d drunk to it all in a spirit
of friendship.

_ So that day, in the evening, alone and free, I awaited
the arrival of my slightly embarrassed annual guests,
who showed up to a man, because Marisha couldn’t not
come, she’s a forthright woman of noble blood, and all
the rest came thanks to her, and Serge was there, and
my by now former husband Kolya, who has exactly the
same rotten teeth as Alyosha — Kolya came and went
straight to the kitchen to unpack everything they'd
brought, ready-boiled potatoes with dill and cucumber,
and lots of wine in anticipation of a whole night’s drink-
ing. And why shouldn’t they make merry, after all, when
there was someone else’s empty apartment available
and there was the additional interest of my delicate sit-
uation: how, in other words, I was going to react to the
arrival of my newly-wedded relations Kolya and
Marisha, who’d officially registered their marriage just
the day before? So that was how things stood, and there
was Serge too, a bit more impatient than usual to get
down to drinking; he and Zhora immediately embarked
on washing away all the recent events. There’d been no
trace of Lenka Marchukaite for ages; we’d heard that she
was wandering round with her bosom tied up with a
warm scarf, someone had seen her in the metro after
she’d given birth to the still-born child; she hadn’t
moaned about it, but only complained that her milk had

come. So Andrei-the-snitch put on a record and Nadya,
his underage girl, started playing the proper Russian
baba’ again and telling me how much alimony Andrei
paid and that it was useless for him even to get a PhD,
everything would go on the alimony anyway, and when
would it all end? In fourteen years, when Nadya would
be hitting thirty three; only then could she consider
having a child of her own. Tanya the Valkyrie came in,
joyfully flashing her teeth and eyes, and I asked her
whether they'd put Sonya and her boy to sleep together,
it would be cosier like that, and Tanya in reply, as always,
just snorted quietly, showing even more of her enormous
teeth, whereas Marisha, on the contrary, quite unlike
her old self, got mad at me when I asked:

‘What do they get up to there?

‘They get up to precisely that,’ the joyful Tanya
replied.

‘It’s all very well for you, you’ve got a boy, but it’s
not so good for Marisha; Marisha, have you taught
Sonya how to protect herself?

‘Don’t worry, I’ve taught her,’ answered Marisha and
went to join the quietly snorting Tanya, although I, as
usual, had spoken the pure truth.

‘What’s going on?’ asked Nadya, whose eye was just
about to pop out of its orbit.

‘Nadya,’ I said, ‘is it true you’ve got one false eye?’

‘She’s always like that,’ said the radiant Tanya to
poor Nadya, and at this point Andrei-the-snitch had his
Say:

‘I take an extremely negative view of you,’ he an-
nounced, recalling Serge’s formula; but I paid no atten-
tion to Andrei-the- snitch.

Serge and Zhora emerged from the kitchen, already
the worse for wear, and my Kolya came out of our


former bedroom, and I knew very well what he’d been
up to in there.

‘So, Kolya, have you already helped yourself to the
-best sheets?’ I asked, and realised that I'd hit the nail
on the head. Kolya shook his head and twisted a finger
at his temple to indicate a screw loose; but as a result,
thanks to my perspicacity, he didn’t take a single item
of bed linen during this visit.

‘Marisha, do you and my husband have something
to sleep on? I realise you must have had to allocate a
share of the sheets to Serge. And all my sheets have
been ruined in the wash; on his last visit Kolya for the
first time in his life undertook to wash all the sheets
and threw the whole lot into boiling water, and all
the various stains, all the protein in them got nicely
brewed up, and now they show up in the form of
clouds.’

' Whereupon they all burst out laughing with a friendly,
satisfied laugh and sat down to table. I'd played
my role, and now it was Serge’s turn to play his, and he
in his vague, inarticulate way, with his nasal voice,
started arguing with Zhora about a certain Ryabikin’s
general theory of fields; in the course of this Serge
furiously attacked Ryabikin, and Zhora condescendingly
defended him, and then appeared reluctantly to give in
and agree, and for the first time one caught a glimpse,
in Serge, of the unsuccessful scientist, the one who
hadn't made it, whereas in the downtrodden Zhora
one saw, for the first time, a rising star in the field of
science, for nothing so betrays personal success as
condescension towards one’s peers. /

‘So when are you defending your PhD, Zhora?’ I asked
him, hazarding a guess, and Zhora took the bait and
immediately answered that the pre-defence examination


was due to take place on Tuesday, and the defence itself
whenever it came to his turn.

Everyone fell silent for a moment, and then they
started drinking. Everyone drank to the point of total
eclipse. Andrei-the-snitch suddenly started complaining
about the local council, which wouldn’t allow them as
a couple to have a three-room apartment, and Nadya’s
papa had been made a general and was creating an
uproar over it all, he kept heaping present after present
on Nadya, and there was already a car there waiting for
her, and a three-room private apartment, if only Nadya
would go to college instead of having a baby.

‘But I want to have a baby,’ said Nadya stubbornly;
no one, however, pursued this theme.

In short, the conversation round the table failed
to gel. Kolya and Marisha were engaged in quiet nego-
tiations, and I knew very well that they were discussing
the fact that he should take all his remaining things
right now and store them away somewhere, until they’d
successfully completed the exchange of Marisha’s
apartment for a room for Serge and a tiny two-room
apartment for themselves, so that Sonya would have
somewhere separate to practise her violin, and Serge
would have somewhere to live with his brunette, and
my husband would have somewhere to live with
Marisha. Or maybe they were whispering that it would
be better to give me their two-room apartment and
settle themselves in my three-room apartment and begin
the exchange from there.

‘Do you like it here in my apartment, Marisha?’ I
asked. ‘Maybe you'd like to move in here, and Alyosha
and I will move out wherever you say? Alyosha and
1 don’t need much, you can take our things.’

‘Fool,’ said Andrei loudly. ‘Complete idiot! All


Marisha’s thinking is that they shouldn’t take anything
away from you, you idiot!

‘But why on earth, help yourselves!’ I said. ‘I don’t
need much myself, and Alyosha after all is leaving
altogether, he’s going to a children’s home. I’m already
busy making the arrangements. It’s in Borovsk.’

‘Really,’ said Kolya. ‘Whatever next.’ -

‘Let’s get out of here, this show is beyond ...’ said
Andrei-the-snitch, and he even made a decisive move
to stand up together with his Nadya, but the others
didn’t stir, it was important to them to see the trial to
its conclusion.

‘’m arranging to have him put in a children’s home.
Here are the application forms,’ I said and, without
getting up, reached up for the already completed forms
from behind the glass of the book case.

Kolya took one look at them and tore them up.

‘Brazen idiot,’ said Andrei.

I leaned back in my chair:

‘Have a drink, eat up, I’m about to serve pies with
cabbage and jam.’

‘All right,’ said Serge, and they began drinking again.
Andrei put on a record, and Serge went up to his
estranged wife Marisha and invited her to dance. Marisha
blushed; it was such a delight to see her furtive glance,
directed at me, for some reason straight at me. I’ve
become the yardstick of conscience here, I muttered
to myself, setting the cabbage pie on the table.

At this point everything began to whirl, the cele-
bration of their great love had begun, everyone was
singing and yelling what a terrific time they were
having, when suddenly Kolya, left out of things, came
up to me and asked: but where’s Alyosha?

‘I don’t know, playing around somewhere,’ I said.



‘But it’s past midnight,’ said Kolya and went out to
the hall.

I didn’t stop him, but he didn’t put on his coat; on
the way out he disappeared into the lavatory and
stayed there, in silence, for an eternity, and meanwhile
Marisha started feeling sick, she’d drunk too much and
in the end was reduced to hanging out of the kitchen
window and throwing up all her beetroot straight onto
the wall — as I gathered later, from the caretaker of the
block who turned up the next day.

Pies, cigarette butts, ravaged salads, half-eaten apples
and apple cores, bottles under the sofa, Nadya sobbing
violently and clutching her eye, and Andrei, who had
Marisha in his arms and was dancing with her — this
was their one celebrated act of the year, accomplished
this time after Marisha had splattered the evening’s
menu all over the front of the house, and Nadya was
witnessing it for the first time in her life and was so
terrified by the whole business that she’d.lost her eye.

Then Andrei gathered himself and sternly gathered
up Nadya; we'd got to closing time on the metro, Serge
and Zhora amiably put on their coats, Kolya emerged
from the lavatory and absent-mindedly lay down on
the sofa, but Zhora picked him up and led him out, and
the joyful Tanya brought up the rear, and at last I
opened the door for all of them, and they all saw
Alyosha, who'd fallen asleep out there on the stairs.

I jumped out, lifted him up and with a wild cry:
‘What the hell are you doing here!’ and slapped him in
the face, so hard that the child, not yet awake, started
bleeding and choking. I started thrashing him all over,
whereupon they ail fell upon me, twisted me round,
thrust me through the door and slammed it shut, and
someone went on holding the door for a long time



afterwards while I went on thumping away at it, and
from the other side I could hear someone sobbing and
Nadya shouting:

‘... with my bare hands! My God! Of all the vile
things!’

And Kolya, descending the stairs, kept shouting:

‘My Alyosha! Little Alyosha! That’s it! I'm taking you
with me! That’s it! I don’t care where the fuck we go,
but you’re not staying here! The bitch!’

I bolted the door. My calculations had been correct.
One and all of them were unable to bear the sight of
a child’s blood; they were quite capable of tearing each
other to pieces, but children were the holy of. holies for
them.

I rolled into the kitchen and looked out of the
window, over Marisha’s by now half-erased vomit. I
didn’t have long to wait. The whole company tumbled
out the front door. Kolya was carrying Alyosha!
Altogether it was a triumphant procession. Everyone
was talking excitedly, still waiting for someone. Andrei
was the last to come out, so it must have been he
who’d been holding the door. When he emerged to
protect the rear flank, Nadya greeted him by shrieking
‘Deprive her of her maternal rights, that’s what!’
Everyone was in top form. Marisha was fussing with a
handkerchief over Alyosha. Drunken voices carried far
and wide round the neighbourhood. They’d even got a
taxi! Kolya and Alyosha, with Marisha supporting them,
Staggered into the back seat; Zhora sat in front.
Zhora was obviously — as always — going to pay, that’s
definite, I thought, it was on the way to Zhora’s anyway
and Zhora always took a taxi in any case. What did it
matter, the point was they’d get there.

And they wouldn’t take me to court, they weren’t


that sort. They’d hide Alyosha from me. They'd
surround him with attention. And even longer than
everyone else, Andrei-the-snitch and his childless wife
Nadya would go on romantically loving Alyosha. Tanya
would take him to the sea for the summer. And the
Kolya that had taken Alyosha in his arms was no longer
the same Kolya that had slapped a seven-year-old child
in the face just because he’d wet his bed. Marisha
would also love and pity my little, rotten-toothed
boy, who’d shown not the slightest talent in any
sphere..And Zhora, who was going to be rich, would
fork out and toss a bit of bounty his way, just you
wait and see, he’d get Alyosha into college. It was a
different matter with Serge, who was, on the whole, an
unromantic character, dry, cynical and mistrustful
— he’d end up living with the only being he genuinely
loved, with Sonya, his daughter, and his crazed love
for her would lead him round every corner and down
every back street and into all the dark cellars of life
until he finally acknowledged it fully and abandoned
all other women and lived for her sake alone, the girl
whom he’d fathered from his own loins. There’ve been
other such cases, now and in the past. That would give
my little crowd of friends a surprise, something to
worry about and puzzle over in the future, but not
straight away, not for another eight years, and during
those years Alyosha would have time to gather his
strength and intelligence and everything he needed. I'd
thus settled his fate at very small cost. Had I not done
so, he would have wandered from one orphanage
to another after my death and would have been an
unwelcome guest in his own father’s home. But I'd
simply sent him out to the dacha and failed on purpose
to give him the key, and thus he was forced to return,


and I’d forbidden him to knock on the door, and
by that time I'd already taught him to understand the
word ‘forbidden’. And thus the scene of child abuse
I'd staged, at such minimal cost, would provide the
necessary first jolt to set in motion a new, long-lasting,
romantic tradition in the life of my orphaned Alyosha,
with his new, noble-spirited adoptive parents, who'd
forget their own interests and instead protect his.

That’s what I’d calculated, and that’s how it’s going
to be. And it’s also good that the whole mixed family
will be living right here in Alyosha’s own apartment,
in his own home, rather than he in theirs; that’s just
perfect too, for very soon I'll be departing the way of
my ancestors. Alyosha, I think, will come and visit me
on Easter Sundays, mentally I made that pact with
him, pointing out the way there and the day; I believe
he'll guess, he’s a very bright boy, and there, among
the painted eggs and the plastic wreaths and the dishev-
elled, drunk and kindly crowd, he’ll forgive me the fact
that I didn’t allow him to say goodbye, but gave him
a slap in the face instead of a blessing. But it’s better
that way — for everyone. I’m an intelligent woman, I
understand these things.