The difference in age between Mur and Anna Fyodorovna formed a
rapidly diminishing quantity. No one knows why—either the little
wheels in the world’s time mechanism had become worn out, or the cogs
got ground down—it’s just that time began to roll by ata quickened
pace, now and then falling into cardiac fibrillation, and so it turned out
that the speed of motion of this waning period of time, thirty years—if
they are placed between sixty and ninety—hardly meant a thing.
Fyodorovna only noticed that things that were normally done quickly
were done more and more slowly but, on the other hand, now less time
leep. /
ee heck early, if one doesn’t call it the middle of the night—it
wasn’t even four—from a bad dream. A grown man, reduced in size toa
large doll, was lying in a desk drawer and complaining, “Mommy, I feel
so bad here...”
It was her son and her heart constricted from grief; there was no way
help him .. .
an — was no son at all; there was a daughter, and Anna
Fyodorovna woke up terrified because the dream was more powerful
than reality and, for the first few moments after waking up, she was a
that she had a son, but that she had completely forgotten about him.
Then she turned on the light, and in the light the delusion dissipated,
and she remembered that the evening before she had had to rummage
through the desk drawers for a long time, searching for a certain lost
document, and because of this search, this stupid dream had started.
Anna Fyodorovna lay in bed awhile and then decided to get up,
particularly since she never found the document the day before,
Now the document turned up right away. It was her review of a
dissertation ten years ago, and now it was suddenly needed.


The whole house was sleeping and this was bliss, be ita gift or stolen.
No one demanded anything from her, all of a sudden two hours of
personal time were created, and now she was weighing in her mind what
to use them for: to read a book which a patient from long ago, a famous
philosopher or philologist, had given her, or to write a letter to a close
woman friend in Israel.

She fixed her hair, the color of sparrow feathers, and threw an old
sweater over her robe. Her house clothing was never becoming on her;
in a robe, she always looked like a housewife from the suburbs at her
dacha. People thought that the suits which she had started to wear in
her student years looked good on her, Now, whether in a grey or blue
suit, she looked like a professor, which fully corresponded to reality.

Anna Fyodorovna made herself coffee, opened the book on literature
by her famous patient, got a piece of paper ready for the letter and put
a blue dish of candy, which she usually did not allow herself, right next
to her. She inhaled the smell of coffee with pleasure, but did not have
time to take a swallow: Mur, with her back straight as a ruler, appeared
in the kitchen, the wheels of her walking apparatus squeaking now and
then.

Anna Fyodorovna checked the buttons of her sweater nervously to see
if they were done up right. In any case, she could never predict what in
particular she had not done right. If her sweater was buttoned correctly,
then it meant that she had put on dreadful stockings or combed her
hair wrong. And why wrong, if her whole life she had kept the same
look, a braid twisted into a bun at the back of her head. However, the
morning remark could be about anything: the curtains, for example,
were dirty, or the kind of coffee she had made was revolting and smelled
of cooked cabbage . . . The only surprising thing was the freshness
with which Anna Fyodorovna reacted—she would apologize and try to
justify herself. Sometimes she even tried to refute the comment, but
later she always reproached herself. This did not lead to anything good;
Mur would only raise her penciled-in eyebrows even higher so that they
would become hidden under her strawberry-blond bangs, flutter her
long eyelashes slowly and, with eyes the color of an empty mirror, look
at Anna Fyodorovna with disapproval.

This time, after rolling out to the middle of the kitchen, Mur was
silent. Her black kimono hung in empty folds as if there were no body
under it. Only yellowish, bony hands covered in rings that were never



taken off and a long neck with a small head stuck out like those of a
marionette.

Her whole life, as far back as she could remember, Anna Fyodorovna
would prepare herself ahead of time for communicating with her
mother. In childhood, she would stand still in front of her door like a
swimmer before diving into the water. When she became an adult, she
would get ready not for victory but a respectable defeat, like a boxer
before a bout with a very strong opponent. At this pre-morning time, her
mother caught her by surprise and, since she had not prepared herself
in advance, for the first time she saw her with detachment, as if through
someone else’s eyes: an angel stood before her, without gender or age,
and almost without any flesh. Alive only in spirit. But Anna Fyodorovna
knew very well what this spirit was like. Clutching a new book in her
hand, the spirit uttered:

“What a lot of rubbish there is in these memoirs! Who palmed them
offonme...?In 1916 my father and were still living in Paris. I was alittle
girl. Kaspari made me a gift of a tiara in ’22; I was married to him then
and I gambled it away in '24 in Tiflis.1 By that time there was no Kaspari
any more, I was already with Mikhail. He was a great musician,” she
giggled delicately and meaningfully, and Anna Fyodorovna shuddered
because from that point on followed the usual vulgar lexicon, and it was
specifically this shuddering that brought her mother enjoyment. “But
he couldn’t give anyone a good f. . k,” Mur laughed gently. “When it
came to using his prick, he was incredibly bad. There, in Tiflis, I lost the
tiara in a game of cards, and in the portrait Bakst drew, there the tiara is
completely different, a piece of junk, a theatrical prop...”

This was the best page in her recollections—her famous lovers. Their
names were legion. A great deal of paper had been covered by the best
pens in honor of her pale locks and unspoken secrets of the heart, and
one could study the artistic movements at the beginning of the century
through her portraits kept in museums and private collections.

There must have been some mystery to her; it was not only her
lovers who would grow weak before her. Anna Fyodorovna, Mur’s only
daughter, the child of a rare, virtuous caprice, wrestled her whole life
with this riddle. Why was Mur given power over her father, her younger
sisters, men and women, and even over those undefined creatures found
in the narrow and agonizing gap between the sexes? Besides ordinary
men with the most simple-minded intentions, effeminate homosexuals



 

and confirmed lesbians who had strayed from the boring female path fell
in love with her constantly. Anna Fyodorovna could not find an answer
to this question, but submitting to some unknown power, she rushed
to fulfill the next whim of her mother. But Mur, like a pregnant woman,
constantly wanted something new, something indefinable—in a word,
go I know not whither, bring back I know not what.

People who showed even the least bit of resistance to her superhuman
charms simply disappeared from view: Anna Fyodorovna’s husband was
forgotten by all long ago, and the husband of Mur’s granddaughter Katia
and all the relatives of Mur’s last husband as well... It was as if they had
never existed.

“You've made coffee.” Mur placed the mendacious volume before
Anna Fyodorovna and wrinkled her delicate nose.

It smelled good, but she always wanted something else.

“T would like a cup of hot chocolate.”

“Cocoa?” Anna Fyodorovna got up readily from the table without
even having a chance to lament the small, would-be holiday.

“Why cocoa? It’s something disgusting, your cocoa. Can't I simply
have a cup of hot chocolate?”

“I don’t think there’s any chocolate.”

‘There wasn’t any chocolate in the house. That is to say, there were, of
course, mountains of chocolate candies in huge boxes given by patients.
But there was no chocolate either in powder form or in bars.

“Send Katia or Lenochka. How can it be that there's no chocolate in
the house?!” Mur became indignant.

“Right now it's four in the morning,” Anna Fyodorovna tried to
defend herself. But right away she clapped her hands and exclaimed,
“There is, Lord, there is!”

She took an unopened box from the sideboard, quickly ripped the
crackly cellophane, poured out a handful of candy, and with a kitchen
knife separated the fat bottoms of the candies from their worthless
fillings. Mur, who had gotten ready for a fight, immediately lost all her
fire at the sight of such ingenuity.

“Why don’t you bring it to my room...”

Carefully protecting her hand with a thick oven mitt, Anna
Fyodorovna heated the milk in a small briki.? She took care of her hands
like a singer takes care of her throat. And she did have something to
protect: a slender hand with long plump fingers and short, oval-shaped,



iodine-edged nails. Every day, armed with a manipulator, she would
reach into the very center of some eye, carefully avoiding the fibers of
the stretching muscles, the tiny vessels, the tendon of Zinn, and the
dangerous Schlemm’s canal, maneuver through the many membranes
to the ten-layered retina, and with these crude fingers patch, darn, and
glue the most delicate of the world’s wonders...

With her mother’s gilded teaspoon she was skimming the thin milk
foam from the thick chocolate when the ringing of a little bell resounded;
Mur was calling her to her room. After placing a pink cup ona tray, Anna
Fyodorovna entered her mother’s room, She was already sitting at the
card table in a pose characteristic of a lover of absinthe. The bronze bell,
its petal side pressed against the faded cloth, was before her.

“Please give me just milk, without any of that chocolate of yours.”

“One, two, three, four... ten,” Anna Fyodorovna counted as always.

“You know, Mur, the last bit of milk went for this chocolate...”

“Send Katia or Lenochka for some more.”

“One, two, three, four... ten.”

“It’s half past four in the morning. The store is still closed.”

Mur sighed with satisfaction. She arched her narrow eyebrows. Anna
Fyodorovna got ready to catch the cup. Her dried out lip, with a deep
crease in it and radiating a multitude of tiny wrinkles, stretched out in
a derisive smile.

“Can I get a glass of plain water in this house?”

“Of course, of course,” Anna Fyodorovna rushed to comply.

The morning scandal, it seems, did not take place. Or was put off.

“Getting old, poor little thing,” Anna Fyodorovna noted to herself.

It was Wednesday. Appointments at the clinic from twelve. Katia
can get her fill of sleep today. The grandchildren are left to fend for
themselves on Wednesdays. Seventeen-year old Lenochka takes little
Grisha to grammar school before going to the institute. Katia will pick
him up, but they must return home no later than half past five. Katia
works from six, teaches English in night school. There’s food for dinner.
Before leaving, have to buy some milk. The sound of the bell.

“One, two, three, four... ten.”

“Yes, Mur.”

A thin hand is holding dainty metal eyeglasses gracefully in the air
like a lorgnette.

“IT remember on TV, there was the company Oreal.? A very beautiful girl



 

was recommending a cream for dry skin. Oreal. Ithinkit’s an old company,
Yes, yes, Lilechka ordered that perfume in Paris. She wanted a liter bottle,
but her poor lover sent a tiny bottle; he couldn’t manage a big one. But the
scandal was big. But Maetsky brought me a liter-size one... Ah, what am
Isaying, that was LOrigan Coty* and not at all Oreal.. .”

This was a new disaster. Mur turned out to be exceptionally prone to
succumbing to advertising. She needed everything, be it anew cream, a
new toothbrush, or a new super-duper pot.

“Sit down, sit down for a minute,” Mur said in good humor, pointing
to a round piano stool.

Anna Fyodorovna took a seat. She knew all the circles, figure eights
and loops, like the ones in Grisha’s railroad, along which locomotives
of old thoughts glided, making stops and transfers in places of the
great biography that Anna Fyodorovna knew ahead of time. Now the
thoughts of perfume got her going. Then it was about her friend and
rival Lilechka, Maetsky, whom she took away from Lilechka. A famous
director. Her being in a movie, which made her famous. Divorce.
Skydiving—no one could even imagine that she could do that. Then an
aviator—a test pilot and handsome man. He crashed half a year later,
leaving her with the best memories. Then an architect, very famous;
they made a trip to Berlin, she created a furor, No, neither in the
Cheka,* nor in the NKVD,* that’s silly; she never served anywhere, slept
around—yes. And with pleasure! She had a lot of men there. “But you
and Katka are fur stockings... bristly asses...”

Forty years ago, Anna Fyodorovna felt like hitting her with a chair.
Thirty years ago—grabbing her by the hair. And now, sick at heart and
with revulsion, she let the boastful monologues go right past her and
thought with sadness about how the morning, which held such promise,
was now being lost.

The telephone rang, Probably from the department. Something must
have happened, otherwise they wouldn’t be calling so early. She quickly
picked up the receiver.

“Yes, yes! It’s me! I don’t understand... From Johannesburg?”

How could she not have recognized that voice right away, rather
high but not at all a woman’s, with the throaty “r” and with long pauses
between words, as often happens with stutterers who have been cured,
He's choosing his words carefully. Thirty years .. .

At first everything came rushing into her head; she became hot and,



a second later, it all receded, and she broke out in a sweat and terrible
weakness followed...

“Yes, yes, I recognized your voice.”

“How are you?” is an awkward question after so many years.

“Yes, you can. Yes, I’ve no objection. Goodbye.”

She hung up. The blood left even her hands, and the tips of her fingers
became smaller and puckered up, like after a big wash.

“Who called?”

“Marek.”

She should have gotten up and left, but she had no strength.

“Who?”

“My husband.”

“Unbelievable, he’s still alive! How old can he be?”

“He's five years younger than me,” Anna Fyodorovna answered drily.

“So what does he need from us?”

“Nothing. Wants to see me and Katia.”

“That worthless man, totally worthless. | don’t understand how you
could...with him...”

“He has a clinic in Johannesburg,” Anna Fyodorovna tried to change
the topic and succeeded.

Mur livened up. “A surgeon? That’s amusing! Your father was a
surgeon. I was in an automobile accident in the Caucasus. If not for him,
I would’ve lost my leg. He operated brilliantly,” Mur giggled. “I seduced
him while still in a cast...”

The most surprising thing was that the details were endless. Anna
Fyodorovna had known for a long time about Mur marrying on a bet
and winning a diamond broach from a famous friend. Hearing about the
cast for the first time, she was suddenly overtaken by unkind feelings
towards her long-deceased father whom she had loved passionately
in her childhood. He was twenty years older than her mother, the
last representative, if you did not count Anna Fyodorovna herself, of
a German medical family, who devoted himself to his profession to a
degree not compatible with life. But a chance occurrence protected him.
At one point in his youth, when he was a doctor in a district town,
he performed trephination of the skull of a young worker who was
dying from a suppurative inflamation of the middle ear. Under the
new regime the worker rose to the most unbelievable heights, but Dr.
Shtork, who had completely forgotten about him, was not effaced from



 

the memory of the grateful patient, and the latter gave him something
like a permit for safe passage. At any rate, his service as a military
doctor in the tsarist and, subsequently, the Volunteer Army did not
prevent him from succumbing to an honorable and difficult death from
cancer in his own bed.

“Please tell me, this Johannesburg, is it in Germany?”

Someone might think that the old woman's thoughts were leaping like
hungry fleas, but Anna Fyodorovna knew about her mother's striking
peculiarity: she always thought about several things simultaneously, as
if she were spinning yarn out of several strands.

“No. It’s in Africa. The South African Republic.”

“Just think, the Boer War, I remember, I remember... amusing. So
don’t forget to buy me face cream,” and she passed her weak fingers over
her skin, loose and wrinkly like an old apricot.

In times past Mur was interested in events and people as a decoration
for her own life and as extras in her play, but with the years everything
that was of secondary importance was fading away and, in the center of
an empty stage, she alone and her various wishes remained.

“And what's for breakfast?” Her left eyebrow went up slightly,

Breakfast, dinner, and supper did not belong among secondary
things. Food was to be served on a strict schedule. The full silver service,
with a knife rest and a napkin in a ring. But more and more often now,
she would take her fork in her hand and immediately drop it next to her
plate.

“I don’t feel like it,” she would utter with irritation and resentment.
“Maybe I'll have a grated apple or ice-cream...”

Her whole life she enjoyed wanting and getting what she wanted,
and the real misfortune was that her wanting had ended, and death was
terrifying precisely because it signified the end of desires.

The evening before Marek’s arrival Katia cleaned the apartment
till very late. The apartment was run-down. No repairs had been done
for such a long time that the cleaning made little difference: ceilings
with yellowed corners and crumbling molding, old furniture that
needed restoration, dusty books in bookcases with cracked finishes. An
intellectual’s mixture of luxury and poverty. Late in the evening, Katia
and Anna Fyodorovna, both in old, warm robes and looking like worn-



out plush toys, sat down on the Gobelin sofa, which was as worn out as
they were.

Anna Fyodorovna was leaning against one of the arms and Katia, with
her thin legs tucked beneath her, was nestling under her mother’s arm
like a chick under the wing of a flabby hen. There was truly something
chick-like about Katia, although she was almost forty: round eyes ona
small, blond, feathery head, a thin neck, and a long nose shaped like a
beak. A bird-like charm, a bird-like incorporeality. Mother and daughter
had boundless love for each other, but that love kept them from becoming
really close; most of all they were afraid of hurting each other. But since
life consisted mainly of different types of grief, their constant reticence
took the place of quiet complaints and sweet moments comforting
each other, and of thoughts they both harbored and could have voiced,
and for this reason they talked most of all about Grisha’s head cold, or
Lenochka’s exams, or sleeping medications for Mur. When something
significant happened in their life, they only cuddled closer and longer
than usual and sat in silence in the kitchen with empty cups in front of
them.

“Before leaving, he gave me a microscope, smail, copper. It’s
unbelievable how pretty it was,” Katia smiled, “and I immediately took
it to Tanya Zavidonova. Do you remember, she studied in the second
grade with me?”

“You've never told me about the microscope.” Anna Fyodorovna,
without raising her eyes, wrapped herself up even more snugly in her
robe.

“T thought you would get upset if brought ithome ... And Zavidonova
never did return it to me. Maybe her father drank it away... You know, I
loved him so terribly much . . . But why did you still get divorced?”

It was a difficult question and there were too many answers, like
going down steps into a cellar: the deeper you go, the darker it gets.

“We got married and rented a room in Ostankino from a woman
who made communion bread. Her kitchen range was always busy, but
her house was filled with communion bread. And that’s where you were
born. Your first food was this communion bread. We lived there for four
years. Mur lived with her sisters. Eva in the city, Beata at the dacha.
Aunt Eva served Mur her whole life, starched her blouses. An old maid, a
‘secret Catholic, she was unusually strict, never forgave anyone anything,
and adored Mur. She died suddenly, wasn’t even sixty. And my mother


 

immediately asked for me. Couldn’t stand strangers serving her.”

“Why didn’t you say no?” Katia shot back brusquely.

“Well, she was almost seventy and she got that diagnosis... I couldn’t
abandon a dying human being.”

“But she didn’t die, did she. . ?”

“Marek said at that time that she was immortal, like the theory of
Marxism-Leninism.”

Katia snorted. “Witty.”

“Oh yes. But as you can see, he was wrong. Mother, thank God,
survived even Marxism. And the tumor was localized, It ate away part of
a lung and went into remission. I looked after her, Aunt Beata after you.
Mur couldn't stand children—you were immediately moved to Pakhra®
and taken back only as school approached.”

“Why didn’t father move with you here?”

“We didn’t even talk about it. She despised him. And so he lived at
Ostankino until the moment of his departure.”

“Did they really let people out then?”

“A special case. Through Poland. His mother, a communist, escaped
from Poland to Russia with him and his older brother; his father stayed
in Poland and perished. It was a big family; many were saved—some
left for Holland, some for America. I don’t remember any more. Marek
used to talk about them. You have a whole lot of relatives throughout
the world. And, as you can see, he himself went to the RSA,” Anna
Fyodorovna said, sighing.

“And what about Mur?” Katia continued her delayed investigation.

Anna Fyodorovna began to laugh quietly. “She’s ordered a manicurist
for tomorrow and has given orders for her striped blouse to be ironed.”

“No, I mean back then...”

“Mur forbade me to correspond with him, One timean Israeli of Polish
origin arrived, brought several hundred dollars and toys and clothing
for you. She found out and made such a scene that I didn’t know where
to hide. I don’t know what I was afraid of more. In those times people

were put in prison simply for having dollars. I returned everything to
the Pole and asked him to tell Marek not to send us anything so that
nothing would happen to us.”

“How stupid all this is... ,” Kati. i i
sooo = a a whispered condescendingly and

“No, this is life,” Anna Fyodorovna sighed.


But the conversation left a bad aftertaste. Katia, it seems, gave her to
understand that she didn’t have the right approach to life...
She had not noticed that before.

After many days of freezing weather, it let up a bit—snow began to
fall, and Zamoskvorechie® was being covered with snow right before
one’s eyes, From the inhumanly tall entrance of a Stalinist building
with a somber granite foundation an elderly man stepped out in a thick
sheepskin coat and a fur cap with two ear flaps and a back flap which
must have used up two whole fox skins. Walking up towards him on the
wide staircase was some madman in a beige jacket, a red scarf thrown
over his shoulder, no hat, and grey curls covered with snow.

The door had not yet slammed shut when the grey-haired man agilely
skirted the man that was all bundled up and plunged into the entrance.

The man who had entered rang the door bell he was looking for and
heard the sound of someone’s steps some distance from the door, then
a clear woman’s voice shouting, “Grishka, give back the modeling clay!”
Then he heard the light ringing sound of glass and an irritated cry, “Go
on, open the door!” Finally the door opened.

Behind the door stood a large elderly woman with a familiar, small
seed protruding from deep within her face. It is possible that this seed
was a small purplish-blue bean on her cheek that, in years long past,
looked like a nice, light mole. The woman was holding the broken-off
neck of a glass jar and looking at him with fright.

At the end of the corridor, there where it turned toward a small room,
was a puddle, and in it, with a rag in her hands, stood an unknown girl,
not the daughter but the granddaughter of the man who had entered.
She was very tall, awkward-looking, with narrow shoulders and round
eyes. Shouting resounded once more from a room in the back; “Grishka,
give back the modeling clay!”

The guest pulled his suitcase with wheels behind him and stopped.
Anna Fyodorovna, sucking the blood on her cut finger, said to him dully,
“Hello, Marek!”

He gave her a hug. “Anelia, one could go insane! The whole world has
changed, everything is different, only this building is the same.”

Katia with the resisting Grisha walked out from a back room.

“Katushka!” exclaimed the man who had entered.


This was Katia’s long forgotten name from childhood, given to her in
those distant times when she was a plump little infant.

Katia, looking at his youthful sun-tanned face, much more handsome
than she had seemed to remember, recalled how much she loved him,
how ashamed she was of this love and hid it from her mother because
she was afraid of causing her pain. And now it suddenly turned out that
in the depths of her heart this love had not been forgotten, and Katia
felt embarrassed and turned red.

“Here are my children, Grisha and Lenochka.”

And at this point he noticed that Katia’s face was wrinkled and no
longer young, and that her small hands clenched under her chin were
also no longer young looking. And he did not even have time to take a
good look at his newly acquired grandchildren when a door in the back
of the apartment opened slowly and Mur appeared in the doorway,
delicately jingling the metal bars of her walker.

“The Queen of Spades!” the guest whispered in great surprise. “One
could go insane!”

For some reason he began to laugh happily, dashed to kiss her hand
and she, extending her dry hand with an old world flourish, stood before
him—fragile and majestic—as if it were precisely her that the well-
dressed gentleman, this hot number from abroad, had come to visit.
With her manicured hand, the high-society old woman dispelled the
awkwardness everyone felt, and it became clear to all the members of
the family how one should behave in this extraordinary situation.

“You look marvelous, Marek,” she noted amiably. “The years have
been kind to you.”

Marek, without letting go of the hand that had saved them, began to
rattle on in Polish.

... It so happened that this was the language of their childhood—the
language of Miss (nee) Charnetskaya, who had been born in one of the
narrow, semi-Gothic houses of the Old City, and of the grandson of a
pharmacist from Krokhmalnaya, known to the whole world for a variety
of reasons as a Jewish street in Warsaw.

Katia exchanged glances with her mother; even now Mur captured
his attention first, before his daughter, before his grandchildren.

“You may come to my room,” she invited Marek graciously, as if she
had forgotten how strongly she had disliked him thirty years ago. But at
this point something unexpected happened.


“I thank you, Madam. I have only an hour and a half today and I want
to spend it with the children. I'll come by tomorrow to see you, but now,
permit me to see you to your room.”

She did not have time to object when he resolutely and cheerfully
turned the carriage carrying her around and pushed her into the boudoir.

“Your place is as elegant as before. May I help you to that chair?” he
proposed in a tone that did not contain even a suggestion that it could
be otherwise.

Anna Fyodorovna, Katia, and Lenochka stood in the doorway like a
living tableaux, waiting for the screeching, screaming, and breaking of
cups. But none of this happened: Mur sank meekly into the chair. He
bent down, touched her slender foot, slipped it into a dried-out, blue
leather slipper, and said in a rather severe tone, “Now, you absolutely
must not wear such shoes. I'll send you shoes which will be perfect for
you. A special company. Just let the girls measure your foot.”

He left her alone, shut the door softly behind him, and Anna
Fyodorovna, totally dumbfounded, asked him, “How can you talk to her
like that?”

He gave a wave of his hand with an air of nonchalance.

“Experience. In my clinic eighty per cent of the patients are over
eighty, all rich and capricious. I studied for five years how to get along
with them. And your mother is a real Queen of Spades. Pushkin created
his in her image. All right. Let’s go, Grisha, and take a look at what's in
the suitcase.”

And Grisha, immediately forgetting about the modeling clay with
which he had just so nimbly blocked up the drain in the sink, started

to pull behind him the small, well-made suitcase with the promising
exterior.

Anna Fyodorovna stood by the table which was set for dinner.
Everything that was taking place seemed to have nothing to do with
her. Even loyal Katia did not take her eyes off Marek’s tanned face, and
her smile seemed lame and stupid to Anna Fyodorovna.

“What a good thing,” she thought, “that I didn’t color my hair with
that stuff in the dark bottle I bought yesterday. He would’ve imagined
that I was making myself younger for him. But still, it isn’t good that I've
neglected myself so much. When he leaves, I'll color it.”

He turned and glanced in her direction, made a familiar gesture
with his hand as if he were playing ping-pong, and Anna Fyodorovna



recalled how adroitly he had played ping-pong, which was just becoming
fashionable during their courtship.

He talked with the children easily and freely. He held Katia by the
shoulder and did not let her go, and she relaxed under his hand like a
cow.

“Exactly like a cow,” Anna Fyodorovna thought.

‘The gifts were perfect: a cordless phone, a camera, and some high-
tech things. He produced a photo album from the inside pocket of his
fleece jacket. He showed his house in Johannesburg, the clinic, and one
more beautiful, two-storied house at the seashore, which he called his
dacha.

Then he looked at his watch, patted the back of Grisha’s head, and
asked when he could come tomorrow. He had actually spent only an
hour and a half in their house.

“Td like to come earlier, May I?” He turned to Anna Fyodorovna and
it seemed to her that he was a bit afraid of her.

“You don’t have a coat?” Grisha was enraptured.

“As a matter of fact, I do have a jacket at the hotel, but why do I need
it? I have a car waiting for me downstairs.”

The children were looking at him with such admiration that Anna
Fyodorovna became a bit upset and immediately was ashamed of herself;
everything, in the final analysis, was understandable. He had always been
charming, and in his old age had even become handsome... But she was
sick at heart from a vague bitterness and bewilderment.

eK

As is often the case, the family tradition of an absent father
intensified with each new generation. As a matter of fact, the last man
of the house—the last father in their family—was old Charnetsky, the
descendant of a fierce Polish provincial governor, the gentlest parent of
three beauties: Maria, Evelyn, and Beata.

In the beginning Anna Fyodorovna herself was left without a mother
when Mur suddenly left Dr. Shtorkh on a moment’s whim and walked
out of the house, seemingly forgetting to return. After a few days she
sent for her most essential things; her year-and-a-half daughter was not
among them. Mur’s new marriage was not her last, but already in the
right direction. Her intuition told her that the time of decadent poets


and uncontrollable heroes was over. Mur’s first test in the field of new
literature was not the most successful but, on the other hand, the rest
that followed were crowned with success in the end. A real Soviet classical
writer came into her life, a genius at hypocrisy, an ascetic to outward
appearances, and with the utmost nouveau-riche passions in his heart.
Showing a porcelain collection, a newly acquired Borisov-Musatov’ or a
Vrubel® sketch, he would throw up his hands in a charming way and say,
“These are all Murka’s caprices. I took a woman of noble birth and now
have to answer for it...”

The last marriage was perfect and little Anna stayed with her father—
and fora while was forgotten. Mur became part of great literature again;
she had an affair with a major playwright and with a prominent director,
and then several other casual affairs against the backdrop of first-class
health resorts in the south which were quite conducive to such alliances.
Finally a large building was built in Zamoskvorechie, where apartments
were issued not on the basis of plebeian calculations of so many meters
per person but in accordance with the true scope of a writer's soul. But
even here, there were some bureaucratic limitations; they had to register
both sisters in the apartment, and it was decided to go and collect
the little girl. Moreover, Mur discovered that the classical writer who
belonged to her was looking with a non-platonic eye at buxom servers
and young chambermaids, and she decided that the time had come for
consolidating the family by giving the classical writer an opportunity
to prove himself as the parent of a little girl who was no longer a child.

Mur took her seven-year old daughter away from the old surgeon. The
little girl who adored her father was moved from sweetly lazy Odessa to
a newly received, elegant and proper Moscow apartment and gradually
forgot her father, with whom she was now forbidden to communicate. At
Mur’s insistence the girl’s bird-like German family name® was changed
to one known throughout the USSR, she was ordered to call the bald
fat man her “daddy,” and the second aunt—who lived year round at the
writer's dacha—was left in charge of her. In a few years came war time
and evacuation to Kuibyshev,’° which left them with the unforgettable
horror of hunger for the rest of their lives, the return to Moscow ina
hot, official government train car, and the happy reunion with Moscow
which, precisely in those first months after their return, became Anna's
native city. She never did see her own father again and only dimly
guessed at her deep-seated resemblance to him.

 

Anna Fyodorovna’s daughter, Katia, preserved even dimmer
memories of her own father. They were somewhat fragmentary, but
captured in enlarged photos: here she is, ill, with her ears all wrapped up
for warmth, and her father bringing her a puppy right into bed... Here
she is standing on the porch and watching him trying to catch a lost
bucket in a well with a long stick with a hook on the end... Here they
are walking out of a wooden house smelling of bitter smoke, heading
along a snow-covered road to a huge tsarist palace where there are
large windows from floor to ceiling, stoves covered in ornamental tile,
paintings on the walls, and the smell of summer and the forest...

For some reason Katia had almost no memory of her father’s visits
to Pakhra, where she, just as her mother had in her time, lived before
attending school. Only one vivid memory remained: she, Katia, in a
dappled cat-fur coat and fur hat, is walking along a narrow path toward
the bus stop, holding Aunt Beata by one hand and her father by the
other... The bus is already at the bus stop, and she is terribly afraid that
he will be late and won't have time to get on and, pulling her hand away,
she shouts to him, “Run, run quickly!”

In the same year he actually carried out Katia’s recommendation,

It is really surprising how deeply the child’s love had been buried;
for many years Katia neither thought of him nor of the honest German
thing good for studying the cells of an onion skin or the legs of a flea...

Katia’s daughter Lenochka, born early in the marriage, had no
memories of her father whatsoever. Katia divorced her husband a year
after Lenochka’s birth. She never received any alimony from him and
only heard through mutual friends that he was alive,

Until Grisha’s birth, the family consisted of four women, but the
total absence of men did not trouble anyone but Mur. Mur, accustomed
to regarding her daughter Anna as a sexless, colorless being good only
for the hurried care of the household, was ata loss to understand why
her granddaughter Katia lived such a boring life. The surprising thing
for Mur was where the children had come from, given such a total lack
of talent in these women. Just like animals, they f .. k exclusively for
propagation...

Mur was deeply wrong when it came to Katia, She had an extremely
successful, unfortunate love affair for the sake of which she had even left
her incomprehensible first husband and had a fairly hard time with the
object of her great love, bore him Grishka and now, for thirteen years



running, met on rare occasions with her contrite lover and put off, from
one year to the next, the moment of her son’s real acquaintance with
his secret father—who knew about Grisha’s existence but whom Grisha
had never met. Family is holy, he would maintain, and Katia could not
disagree with him.

In this way, the absence of fathers became a deeply inherited
phenomenon in their family, since it asserted itself in three generations.
It would have never occurred to either Anna Fyodorovna or Katia or
even Lenochka, who was becoming a grown-up, to bring even the most
modest, the most insignificant of men into this house which totally
belonged to Mur. Such a right Mur—full of magnificent scorn for her
female descendants—did not grant them. Anna Fyodorovna and Katia
became fully resigned both to the fatherless atmosphere and to their
female loneliness, and Lenochka, a girl infantile precisely in the area
where her great-grandmother’s gifts were manifest in all their glory,
gave men no thought whatsoever.

Thus Anna Fyodorovna felt all the more keenly the whole house going
mad after Marek’s first visit. At the sound of Marek ringing the doorbell,
not only eight-year-old Grishka but also that beanpole Lenochka, who
grew to almost 1.8 meters that winter, and even Katia herself, ran
out with such excited quickness that it seemed at the very least that
Grandfather Frost"? was standing behind the door. And Marek even
kept that tasteless, red-white motif: his bright white, wavy hair rose like
smoke above his African tan and, instead of a banal red robe with white
cotton trim, there was a scarf around his neck of a deep blood-red color

and of that very high quality which almost transforms material values
into spiritual. As was expected of Grandfather Frost, he was cheerful,
red-cheeked, and incredibly generous with all kinds of treats and gifts,
and still more generous with promises. Even Mur showed an excessive
interest in him.

Anna Fyodorovna was tortured by feelings of personal humiliation
which she had not experienced for a long time. Marek, who three days
ago did not know about the existence of Grisha and Lenochka, was
playing such a role in their lives today: Lenochka only talked of where
she could go for her schooling— England or America, and Grisha was
hallucinating about some Greek island where Marek had a dacha—a
two-storied villa backing onto a pink cliff and facing a small bay with
a white yacht secured in the middle of the gulf like a bone broach on



 

blue silk... Grisha gutted an album with Marek’s photographs, and the
color impressions of someone’s unreal life lay scattered throughout the
apartment, even in Mur’s room. But the most painful thing was that
Katia walked around with a stupid, little smile and even hummed a bit,
exactly like her grandmother . . . In addition to everything else, Anna
was also tortured by the fact that she was harboring such base feelings
herself and could not cope with them.

At work Anna Fyodorvna had an unpleasant incident as well. One
of the most difficult patients lately, a young policeman who had come
in not for scheduled treatment but because of a trauma, was operated
on exceptionally successfully, and it could be said with certainty that at
least one eye had been saved. And the other day he moved the television
in the hall from one corner to another, and all the intricate work came
to nothing; new ruptures appeared in the retina, and now it was totally
unclear whether she would be able to save the eye again for this fool...

Marek had come to Moscow on business. His total work came to one,
single meeting with medical officials, and it was scheduled precisely for
the first evening of his arrival. The talk was of some special equipment
for post-operative care of the sick whose production involved him in
some way. As he himself said later, the negotiations were an excuse
for him to see his daughter. All those years he had not renewed that
first attempt at establishing relations with his former family; he had
too much experience dealing with Soviet power, both in its Russian and
Polish variants.

He expected anything and everything from this trip, but in no way
had he counted on meeting such open-hearted and touching children,
his family in fact, who were managing wonderfully without him and
knew nothing about him.

Even the old shrew evoked in him a tinge of gentleness and interest.
He spent several hours with her that day. It so happened that Grisha had
gone to a classmate’s home to jump around this year’s Christmas tree,
and Lenochka had gone to fail her scheduled exam.

Marek, the cunning devil, asked Mur a very good question—about
the Stalin Prize which her classical writer had received at some point.
And Mur plunged into pleasant recollections. Her husband’s last
success coincided with Mur’s new flights of fantasy—a whole string of
bright successes in a closely related field: a stormy affair with a secret
general who held the whole literary process in his hairy fist, an amorous



relationship with her husband’s secretary, and with the husband of a
dear female friend, and with some biologist academician, and with
many others, and the witness to all this was her frowning daughter,
Anna, with Puritan melancholy and deep despair in her heart which she
felt because of the impossibility of loving, and yet her inability not to
love, this thin, inhumanly beautiful, theatrically dressed woman who
happened to be her mother.

Mur told her story in a disjointed way, selectively, sprinkling it with
names and details, but the picture Marek got was drawn with total
clarity. In addition he knew a lot from Anna...

After surviving the glorified leader for a very brief time and
demonstrating his brilliant farsightedness for yet another and last
time to his envious friends, the classical writer died a timely death.
He was put under a heavy grey stone in Novodevichy Cemetery,” and
for a time Mur’s life became somewhat more somber. There was lots of
money, however, and it came flowing in rivers—author’s compensation,
payment for theater productions and royalties. Another woman would
have lived quietly, but Mur began to fret, she became bored with her
affairs, they became dull, her desires lost their former flexibility, and
the years between fifty and sixty turned out to be a bore. Later she
would explain this as menopause. But her menopause ended nicely. Mur
had two small operations, rare in those times; her friend Verochka, a
famous actress, gave Mur her own doctor—and a certain freshening of
her life began. An affair, it goes without saying. Blinding, unforeseen,
with a young actor. Forty years difference. All records were broken, all
sheets rumpled. Her friends were in poorhouses and hospitals, some
were whiling away their last years in exile, but she—vibrant, with perky
breasts, a small behind and the loose skin on her neck tightened—was
entertaining a handsome Gypsy boy whose young wife was raging at the
front door. Moscow rumbles, life goes on... .

And at this point it all came to an end. Unbelievably quickly, the boy
actor became a drunk, her female friends fell away one after another,
her daughter Anna left home and married a skinny student, Jewish—
the type Mur had never liked since childhood. That is, let them live, of
course, don’t put them in gas chambers, but don’t marry them either...

“Interesting, very interesting, who does she take me for?” Marek
thought, but he did not ask any questions. He listened attentively.

... Her former lovers died one after another, both the generals and



the civilians, And the most annoying thing—her sister Eva died, ten
years younger, loyal, devoted .. . She was forced to take Anna back into
the house, and soon Katia was settled there too. She did not have time to
turn around and the house was full of children, a worthless life without
any fun, without any interests...

Entering her mother’s room to remove the teacups, Anna Fyodorovna
noted to herself that Mur had a happy look just like the children and,
moreover, was in a state of full battle readiness: her voice was an octave
lower than usual, purring, her eyes seemed to have doubled in size,
and her back was even more straight, if that is possible. A tigress on
the hunt—that’s how Anna Fyodorovna called her mother in those
moments.

Marek was sitting with a befogged smile.

The last evening of family bliss was taking place, one in which Anna
Fyodorovna tried to participate as little as possible. Grisha was hanging
onto Marek and from time to time would let go of him, but only so that
he could take a run and jump on him even higher and hold him even more
tightly. Lenochka was on her way full speed to failing her exams, but she
neglected her studies in these decisive days, as she followed her new
grandfather like a shadow. Since the tempting thought of England made
her lose her appetite for studying in her own country, she experienced
not the least bit of worry about the next day’s exam, Anna Fyodorovna
tried not to look at Katia: Katia’s facial expression was unbearable,

Shortly after eleven, after saying goodbye to everyone, Marek went
into Mur’s room. Holding a warm hot-water bottle with her feet, she
was watching television and eating chocolate. This was one of her basic
principles: one pleasure must not get in the way of another. As for the
hot-water bottle, which Anna Fyodorovna had refused to use for the
last thirty years, Mur got accustomed from an early age to getting into
a warm bed even on those occasions when the warm hot-water bag was
not her sole night companion.

To Marek, who respectfully bowed down before her, she proffered a
narrow piece of paper condescendingly, half-covered with letters written
by an unsteady hand.

“That's for you, my dear friend. I need a few things.”

Without looking, Marek stuck the piece of paper in his pocket.



“With great pleasure. ..”

He knew how to deal with old ladies. He walked out; Anna Fyodorovna
lingered on, fluffing up the pillows behind Mur’s back.

Mur, licking her finger covered with chocolate, smiled mysteriously
and asked provocatively, “Well, do you see now?”

“What?” Anna Fyodorovna said in surprise. “See what?”

“How my lovers treat me!” Mur smirked.

“First signs of the dimming of the mind,” Anna Fyodorovna decided.

The children wanted to accompany him to the hotel. He was staying
not far away, in the former “Balchug,” which in recent years had become
transformed into something magnificent, like the crystal bridge which
in one night moves from one shore to another through the magic of
words, :

“No, let’s say that we've said our farewells already,” he announced
unexpectedly firmly, and Grisha, who was used to complaining on every
occasion and getting his way, submitted immediately.

Marek wound the insufferably red scarf around his neck and once
more for the last time kissed the children as naturally as if he had not
gotten acquainted with them just five days ago. Then he took Anna
Fyodorovna’s fur coat off the hanger, which had lost a lot of its fur in the
front, and said in a peremptory tone, “Let’s go for one last walk.”

Anna Fyodorovna submitted for some reason, although a minute
before she had not even thought of going outside with him. Without
saying a word, she stared at the fur coat and threw on the Orenburg
scarf she had received as a gift. She took gifts if they brought them to
her—boxes of chocolates, books, envelopes with money. She took them
and thanked the people with restraint. But she never named the prices
for her operations, that is, in this respect she behaved exactly like her
deceased father. Which she never suspected.

Once outside, he took her under his arm. From Lavrushinsky Lane
they walked out onto Ordynka. It was clean, white, and empty. The rare
passers-by would turn and look at the lean foreigner, wearing only a
light-colored jacket and strolling slowly with a not-so-young woman
bundled up in a thick fur coat who could not be related to him in any
way: too intelligent looking to be his housekeeper, and too old and badly
dressed to be his wife.

“What a wonderful city. For some reason I remember it as being
gloomy and dirty...”


“It’s different at different times,” Anna Fyodorovna responded
politely.

“Why did you come?” she thought. “You've turned everything upside
down, upset everybody.” But she did not say this.

“Let's go somewhere and sit a while,” he suggested.

“Where? At night?” she said in surprise,

“There are lots of night establishments. There’s a marvelous
restaurant nearby—we ate there with the children yesterday...”

“You have to get up tomorrowat the crack of dawn,” Anna Fyodorovna
evaded the suggestion.

Marek was leaving on an early flight; she herself got up at half past
six, The reference to tomorrow calmed her. He'll leave, everything will
return to normal, and the unsettled state in the house will come to an
end.

“I want to invite the children to Greece for the summer. You've no
objection?”

“No objection...”

“You're an angel, Anelia... And my greatest loss... “

Anna Fyodorovna kept silent. Why did she come out here with him?
From a long-time habit of submitting in domestic matters ... She should
have refused.

He sensed her inner irritation and grabbed her fluffy mittens with
his hand in a thin glove.

“Anna, do you think I don’t see anything and don’t understand? The
emigration experience is very difficult, very. And I had three of them.
From Polish to Russian, from Russian to Hebrew, the last fifteen years
English . . . And each time you live through everything all over again,
starting with the alphabet . . . There were lots of things, all kinds of
things. And I was in the war, and went hungry, and even spent time in
prison...”

What a sweet boy he was once, a third-year student who in no way
resembled the strong bucks who performed the energetic ritual of a
dog's wedding near her mother. Because of her duties as a graduate
student, she was then in charge of a student club and their love affair
began among the lab flasks and bacilli. For a long time and with great
care she hid their relationship from everyone. She was ashamed that
he was so young. But it was exactly his youth, the absence of aggressive
flesh in him, which unconsciously drew her to him. He had a white


hairless chest and on the left, near one nipple, there was a constellation
of moles—the Big Dipper. And he remained the only man in her life,
but she never regretted that he was her only one, nor the fact that it
was precisely him... But she always knew that marriage was incidental
for her. At around sixteen she had decided that she would never marry;
there was nothing more repelling for her than the purring voice, excited
laughter, and drawn-out groans from her mother’s bedroom .. . the
eternal pursuit, being in heat, being in heat... For a moment she
plunged into a very strong child-like feeling that sex was dirty and
could never be washed off, when it was awkward to look at a married
couple because a picture would come to mind of how they, sweating
and groaning, were occupied with this abomination... How wonderful
to be a nun, in clean white clothing, without all this... But still, what
happiness that she had Katia... /

Marek was talking and talking, but it flew past her like snow.
Suddenly his faltering words broke in on her reverie: “. . ie real miracle
that damnation is turning into a blessing. This monster, with a genius for
egoism, the Queen of Spades, destroyed everyone, buried everyone...
And how do you put up with it? You're simply a saint .. .

“Me? A saint?” Anna Fyodorovna stopped in her tracks as if she had
run up against a post. “I'm afraid of her. And there is duty. And pity...

He brought his face closer to hers and it was apparent that he was at
that young at all, that his skin was that of an old person, covered in small,
sharply outlined wrinkles and dark age spots under a year-round tan.

“How, how can | help you?” ,

She waved her grey mitten. “See me home .. -

ae

Marek called from his Johannesburg more often than her female
friends called from Sviblov. Grisha waited eagerly for his calls; he
would throw himself at the phone like a kite’ and shout to everyone
indiscriminately, “Marek! Is that you?” Lenochka was studying only
English, intent on leaving. A business-like approach suddenly awakened
in her which had not been part of her character before; she was selecting
the place of her future studies in a sensible, exacting way. Even Katia,

i kite: small bird of the hawk family. —Trans.



always calm and a bit sleepy, was waiting for some vague changes in one
way or another connected with her father’s appearance and, it seems,
she had cooled somewhat toward her secret friend who, on the other
hand, had begun lukewarm talk about him possibly leaving his family.

Marek began fulfilling his parental promises with enthusiasm. The
first heralds were shoes for Mur that had a completely orthopedic look.

They were extremely ugly and probably just as extremely comfortable.
They were brought directly to the house by practically the Secretary of
the Israeli Embassy, an old friend of Marek’s. Mur did not even try them
on; she just went “hmm.” The shoes had low heels and the kind of rubber
soles that old folks like, but for the last seventy years Mur wore only
open toe pumps with elegant heels which varied and depended on the
latest fashion.

‘The pair of shoes was followed by a pair of two small computers whose
price, at that, was in reverse Proportion to their size, He had also taken
the trouble to find computer games for Grisha. Lenochka had not yet
recovered from the amateur movie camera he had left her before leaving,
had not yet gotten her fill of that special perspective on the world which
Opens up through the viewfinder, and the new gift was already goading
her on, demanding she learn as quickly as possible everything that could
be done with its magical power.

Finally, six weeks after Marek’s departure, an invitation came from
Thessalonica, signed bya certain Evangelia Daula, who was a close friend
of Marek’s wife, about whom the only information was that she had a
Greek friend who would send the invitation...

The invitation was worded in such a way that they could go at any
time, from June through September.

Grisha, so excited that he was on cloud nine just from the look of
the envelope with the rectangular window, flew around the apartment
with it until he ran against Mur who was heading for the kitchen in her
metallic apparatus. He thrust the envelope in her face,

“Look, Mur, we’re going to Greece, to the island of Serifos. Marek has
invited us!”

“What foolishness!” Mur snorted, who never made any allowances
for age. “You're not going anywhere.”

“But we will go, we will!” Grisha shouted, jumping up and down from
the excitement.

And then Mur tore her hand away from the handle of her walker and


brought a magnificent “fig”* right under the nose of her eight-year-old
grandson, with her thumb and its bright-red nail prominently visible.
With her other hand she adroitly grabbed the invitation from the
boy who had not expected such a brazen attack and was taken aback.
Leaning her elbows against the side bars for support, she crumpled the
envelope and threw a large ball, the size of a good snowball, right toward
the entrance door...

“You reptile! Reptile!” Grisha howled and rushed to the door.

Katia ran out of her room and grabbed her son without understanding
what had happened between her son and her grandmother. Grisha was
straightening out some piece of paper and continuing to scream out
words one did not expect from him,

“You vile snake! You freaking bitch!”

Lowering her sad eyelids, Mur turned to her granddaughter with a
gentle reproach. “Take your little bastard, my dear. Children must be
taught manners, my dear.” And with her wheels squeaking, she headed
into the kitchen.

Katia, without understanding yet what the paper ball was that the
sobbing Grisha was fiddling with, dragged him to his room, where his
sobs resounded for a long time.

That day Anna Fyodorovna came home more tired than usual—there
are things that wear a person out more than work itself. A girl who
had been seriously injured was brought in. There was no doctor in the
children’s section with the required training and qualifications. The girl
was Grisha’s age, with a wound caused by a fragment of broken glass.
The operation was very difficult.

Putting the instrument for measuring blood pressure in its case, Anna
Fyodorovna reflected: where does Mur get her energy? Given her blood
pressure, she should feel sleepy, weak... Instead there is aggressiveness,
sharp reactions. Probably some other kind of mechanisms come into
play. Yes, gerontology...

“You're not listening to me! What are you thinking about? I’m against
it, do you hear me? I haven’t been to Greece! They won't go anywhere!
Mur pulled at Anna Fyodorovna’s sleeve.

“Yes, yes, of course. Of course, mom.”

“What—of course? What’s this ‘mom’ stuff?” Mur screamed.

“Everything will be as you want,” Anna Fyodorovna said, trying to
appease her.



“No, my dear, this time—no,” Anna Fyodorovna firmly decided.
For the first time in her life. The word no had not yet been said out
loud, but it already existed, it had already broken through like a weak
shoot. She decided simply to confront her mother with the fact of family
insubordination and not conduct any preliminary discussions about it.
One could only imagine what a storm this transparent insect would
raise when it became clear that the children had left,

Toward the beginning of June the foreign passports were ready, the
visas obtained. The tickets were ordered for Athens for the twelfth of
June. That day, in accordance with Anna Fyodorovna’s shrewd strategy,
was earmarked for the move to the dacha. Everything was thought
through to the smallest detail. In the morning Katia would leave with
the children for Sheremetyevo Airport, which should not evoke any
suspicions since Katia always headed for the dacha earlier in order to
prepare the house for Mur’s arrival. A car was ordered for twelve to
take Mur and Anna Fyodorovna to the dacha. With the turmoil of the
move, Anna Fyodorovna hoped to soften the blow, especially as the
dacha preparations would happily mask their criminal flight. Grisha
and Lenochka were flying high as they waited, especially Grisha. The
half-Greek grandfather had turned up at the perfect time. All of Grisha’s
classmates had already spent some time abroad; he was almost the
only one who had not been farther than Krasnaya Pakhra. And his
grandfather himself, grey and curly-haired, standing on board a white
yacht, was shown to the whole class and successfully compensated for
the absence of a father.

The night before they were to leave, Anna Fyodorovna and Katia had
a hard time sleeping. Toward morning Marek called and told them not to
take any extra belongings; Greece had everything, as everyone knows.
He was waiting with anticipation and would meet them at the airport.

At half past seven Mur demanded coffee. The morning coffee was
served with milk, and the after-dinner coffee had to be black. Anna
Fyodorovna helped Mur get dressed and made the coffee. After which
she discovered that the milk carton in the refrigerator was empty. This
was Lenochka’s negligence; she constantly put empty cartons back in
the refrigerator. It was getting towards eight. The taxi to Sheremetyevo
had been ordered for half past eight.



Anna Fyodorovna, in a blue house dress, in slippers over bare feet,
slipped out of the house and ran to Ordynka Street for the milk. This
never took more than ten minutes. At first she hurried at a light run, but
then she suddenly slowed down—the morning was unusual: a smoky,
barely light-blue light, the sky iridescent like the iris of the bluest big
eye, and the purest greenery on the cleaned up square near the round
Church of the All Sorrowful, where Anna Fyodorovna would drop by
from time to time. She walked on slowly and freely as if she were not
hurrying anywhere. Galia the saleswoman, a local Tatar woman on
Ordynka who had worked her whole life in the local stores, greeted her
affectionately. About fifteen years ago Anna Fyodorovna had operated
on her mother-in-law.

“How’s Sofia Akhmetovna?”

It is surprising, given the number of gold teeth, how a smile can
appear timid and childish...

“She’s gone totally deaf, doesn’t hear a thing. But her eyes see!”

Anna Fyodorovna took a cool carton of milk in her hands. In fifteen
minutes the children would leave, and in two more hours Mur would find
out that they had left. Most probably this would be when she was already
in Pakhra. She imagined Mur’s pale eyes, her usually quiet, rather hoarse
voice rising to a piercing, crystal clear scream. Pieces of broken dishes.
The most foul, the most intolerable swearing—that of a woman... And
suddenly she saw it as if everything had already taken place: she, Anna,
swinging her limp hand and landing a sweet blow on the rouged old
cheek... And she did not care what happened after that...

A feeling of wonderful freedom, victory and triumph was in the air,
and the air was so intensely bright, so incandescently bright. But there
and then it went out. Anna Fyodorovna did not have time to realize what
was happening. She fell forward without letting go of the cool carton,
and her light slippers slipped off her strong and heavy German feet.

Mur at that time was already raising a storm.

“The house is full of good-for-nothings! Is it that hard to buy a bottle
of milk?”

Her clear, resonant voice was full of rage.

Katia looked at her watch: fifteen minutes remained before the
taxi was due. “Where has mother gone to?” she puzzled. But there was
nothing to be done and she ran for the milk.

Galia, a saleswoman she knew, was rushing about on the sidewalk.



A thin crowd had gathered in front of the store entrance. There, on the
sidewalk, lay a woman in a blue dress with stars on it. An ambulance
came in about twenty minutes, but nothing could be done for her.

Katia, pressing the still cool carton of milk to her chest, saul over
and over to herself, “milk, milk, milk...” until they sent nae to get her
mother's passport. And when she was already approaching the house
she repeated, “passport, Passport, passport...”

At home Katia found a noisy argument. The taxi driver, who had been
waiting for them downstairs for about twenty minutes as peragreement,
went up to the apartment to find out why the people who had to get fo
Sheremetyevo were not coming down. :

Grisha, shaking from impatience like a puppy before its morning
walk, began to yell ina happy voice, “Mur! We’re going to Sheremetyevo
Airport!”

Mur, rolling from side to side in her metal cage, walked out into the
hallway and guessed that they had wanted to fool her. She forgot about
both the coffee and the milk. Using expressions which even the driver
did not hear every day in his life, she announced that no one was goin;
anywhere and that the driver could get the hell out of there which
brought the driver, a young fellow with a diploma from a theatrical
institute, into a state of purely professional excitement; he leaned
against the wall, enjoying the unexpected drama.

“Where is that fucking chicken? Whom did she want to fool?” She
raised her boney hand and the sleeve of her precious old kimono fell
back, revealing a dry bone which, if one is to believe Ezekiel,!? was
supposed to become covered with new flesh with the passing of ame

Katia walked up to Mur and, swinging her limp hand wide, landed a
sweet blowon her yet-to-be-rouged old cheek, Mur staggered in her small
cage, then grew still, clinging to the railing of her captain's bridge from
which she directed life in general for the last ten years after breaking the
neck of the femur in her thigh, and said distinctly and quietly, “What?
What?” Everything will be the way I want it anyway...”

Katia walked past her, opened the carton, and splashed some milk
into the coffee which had already grown cold.