Glaciers, mammoths, wildernesses. Pitch-dark, black rocks, somehow reminding one of houses; in the rocks—caves. And one cannot tell who trumpets of a night along the stony path amid the rocks and, sniffing his way, drives the white snow dust before him. It may be the grey-trunked mammoth; it may be the wind; and it may be that the wind is only the icy roar of some super-mammothish mammoth. One thing is clear: it is winter. And one must clench one’s teeth as tight as possible, to prevent them from chattering; and cut wood with a stone axe; and each night move one’s fire from cave to cave, always deeper; and muffle oneself up in an always increasing number of shaggy hides.

Of a night, among the rocks where ages ago stood Petersburg, roamed the grey-trunked mammoth. And muffled up in bides, in coats, in blankets, in rags,—the cave-dwellers were constantly retreating from cave to cave. On the 1st October Martin Martinych and Masha barred up the study; on the 22nd they abandoned the dining-room and entrenched themselves in the bedroom. They had nowhere to retreat now; here they must hold out,—or die.

In this cave-bedroom of Petersburg, things were like in Noah’s ark: clean and unclean creatures in ark-like promiscuity. Martin Martinych’s writing-desk; books; cakes of the stone age looking like pottery; Skryabin, op. 74; a flat-iron; five lovingly white-washed potatoes; nickelled bed-frames; an axe; a chest of drawers; a stack of wood. And in the middle of all this universe was its god : a short-legged, rusty-red, squatting, greedy cave-god: the iron stove.

The god was humming powerfully, in the dark cave—the great miracle of fire. The human creatures—Martin Martinych and Masha—were stretching out their hands to him piously, silently, gratefully. For one hour it was spring in the cave; for one hour hides, claws and tusks could be thrown aside; and through the frozen brain-crust showed green sprigs—thoughts.

“Mart, and you have forgotten that tomorrow! . . . Well, well, I see—you have forgotten!”

In October when the leaves are sere and weltered—a blue-eyed day may occur—you look up into the sky of a day like that, so as not to see the earth,—and you may believe it is still joyful, it is still summer. So it was with Masha,—if you shut your eyes and only listened to her voice you could believe that she was still the same as before, that she was going to laugh, jump up from her bed, and hug you; and only an hour ago it had sounded like a knife on glass—not her voice, not she.

“Oh, Mart, Mart! How everything . . . You used not to forget. The 29th! St. Mary’s . . . ”

The iron god was still humming as before. There was no light; not till ten. The ragged dark vaults of the cave were swimming. Martin Martinych—squatting, all in a knot—as tight as he could, his face towards the ceiling, was still looking at the October sky,—not to see the withered, weltered lips. And Masha—

“Don’t you understand, Mart? If tomorrow we could begin heating in the morning, so that it might be all day like it is now. Eh? How much have we left? There must be half a sazhen in the study?”

It was ages since Masha had been strong enough to get as far as the Arctic study, and she did not know that there already . . . Tighter the knot, still tighter!

“Half a sazhen? More; I should say there was . . . ” Suddenly it was light: ten o’clock. And without finishing Martin Martinych turned away: it was more difficult than in the darkness. And now that it was light, you could see his face was crumpled and clayish; many people have clayish faces now: back to Adam. But Masha went on:

“And do you know, Mart, perhaps I’ll try and get up … If you begin heating early.”

“Of course, Masha, of course . . . A day like this . . . Of course, I’ll begin early.”

The cave-god was quieting down… now he was quite quiet, only just crackling. One could hear downstairs at the Obértyshevs’, some one was cutting logs off a river float with a stone axe—hewing Martin Martinych to pieces with the stone axe. A chip of Martin Martinych was smiling claylike at Masha and grinding dried potato skins in a coffee mill to make cakes with—and another chip of Martin Martinych, like a bird that had flown into the room from outside, was stupidly, blindly rapping at the ceiling, the window-panes, the walls: “Where to find wood—where to find wood—where to find wood?”

Martin Martinych put on his coat; a leather belt over the coat (the cave-dwellers have a myth that this makes you warmer); in the corner by the chest of drawers he made a noise with the pail.

“Where are you going, Mart?”

“In a moment. To fetch water from downstairs.”

On the dark staircase, all icy from frozen water splashes, Martin Martinych stood for a moment, rocked about, heaved a sigh and clanking the pail, as if it were a convict’s chain, went downstairs to the Obertyshevs’: they still had water running in their flat.

The door was opened by Obertyshev himself; he was in a coat belted with a rope; unshaven, his face was like a waste overgrown with some scrub, reddish and soaked with dust. Through the scrub—yellow stone teeth, and amid the teeth—like the lightning tail of a lizard—a smile.

“Ah, Martin Martinych! Come for water? Please, please, please.”

In the narrow little cage between the outer and inner door it was impossible to move with the pail; in the cage was Obertyshev’s stack of wood. The clay Martin Martinych bruised his side against the wood; and again in the dark corridor against the corner of the chest of drawers. Then through the dining-room; in the dining-room was Obertyshev’s dam and their three cubs; the dam hurriedly hid a dish under a serviette: a man had come from another cave—who could tell, he might fly at her, snatch it away.

In the kitchen, as he turned the tap, Obertyshev smiled with his stone teeth:

“Well, how’s your wife? How’s your wife? How’s your wife?”

“Oh, Alexey Ivanych, just the same. Bad. Tomorrow is her nameday, and I haven’t . . .”

“Everyone, Martin Martinych; it’s the same with everyone, everyone, everyone.”

One could hear in the kitchen the bird in the room fluttering, beating its wings, right, left,—and suddenly with despair, with all its might throwing itself flat against the wall.

“Alexey Ivanych, I wanted—Alexey Ivanych, could you lend me five or six pieces of wood?”

Yellow stone teeth flashed through the scrub, yellow teeth showed through the eyes,—the whole of Obértyshev became covered with teeth growing longer and longer.

“Bless you, Martin Martinych, bless you, bless you! We are quite as . . . You know very well how things are nowadays, you know, you know . . . ”

Tighter the knot! Tighter—still tighter! Martin Martinych screwed himself up, lifted the pail—and back through the kitchen, through the dining-room, through the dark corridor. On the threshold of the dining-room, Obértyshev shoved out his lightning, lizard-like hand:

“Well, bye-bye . . . Only please, Martin Martinych the door; don’t forget to slam it, don’t forget. Both doors, both, both,—can’t keep warm!”

On the dark icy landing place Martin Martinych put down the pail, turned back; shut the first door carefully. He listened— but heard only his own dry bony shivering and his own trembling breath, all in jerks. In the narrow little cage between the two doors he stretched out a hand, felt a log, another, another. No! he thrust himself back out on to the landing place, half shut the door. It remained only to shut it closer, that the lock should turn.

And now—he could not. He could not shut the door on Masha’s ‘ tomorrow.’ And on a line drawn by his hardly audible jerky breath—two Martin Martinyches had come to a deadly stand: the old one, with Skryabin and all, who knew: I mustn’t; and the new one, the cave one, who knew: I must. The cave one, grinding his teeth, brought the other one down, stifled him—and Martin Martinych, breaking his nails, opened the door, shoved his hand into the stack of wood, one log, a fourth, a fifth one—under his coat, behind his belt, into the pail—slammed the door and sped upstairs—in enormous, animal-like jumps. Halfway up the staircase, on one of the slippery steps—he suddenly remained motionless, wishing to disappear into the wall; he heard the door downstairs again—and the dusty voice of Obértyshev:

“Who’s there? Who’s there? Who’s there?”

“It’s me, Alexey Ivanych. Me—I forgot the door . . . I thought . . . I went back—to shut it better . . . ”

“You? Hum . . . How’s that? You should be more careful, more careful. Everyone steals now, you know yourself, you know yourself. How could you?”

The 29th. From early morn—a low wadding-like sky, all in holes, and the frost creeping in through the holes. But the cave-god had had his fill from early morning, and was humming benevolently—and what if there are holes, what if Obértyshev— all teeth—counts his wood—let him—it doesn’t matter. If only today! Tomorrow is a word incomprehensible to the cave mind; centuries will pass before there will again be tomorrow, or the day after for him.

Masha has got up, and rocking, from an unseen wind, has done her hair in her old way: over the ears with a parting in the middle. It looked—like a last, weltered leaf hanging on a bare tree. Martin Martinych extracted from his writing-desk some papers, letters, a thermometer, a little blue scent-bottle (which he hurriedly stowed away again—lest Masha should see)—and at last from the furthest recess of the drawer a little black lacquered box: in it was real, yes! yes! quite real tea! They drank real tea. Martin Martinych, with his face to the ceiling, listened to a voice that was so like what it used to be.

“Mart, do you remember: my little blue room, and the piano with a cover on it, and on the piano that wooden ashtray like a horse, and I was playing, and you came up from behind . . . ”

Yes, that evening a new world had been created, and that wonderful wise old face of the moon, and the nightingale song of the electric bells in the corridor.

“And do you remember, Mart: the window open, the sky quite green—and below, from another world—the hurdy-gurdy?”

Hurdy-gurdyman, wonderful hurdy-gurdyman, where are you?

And, “you remember, on the Embankment? The boughs were still bare, the water rosy, and the last blue block of ice floating past, looking like a coffin. And it was only funny, its looking like a coffin, because we were never to die. You remember?”

Downstairs they had begun to cut wood with their stone axe. Suddenly they stopped, began running about, screaming. Hewn in two, Martin Martinych’s one half saw the immortal hurdy-gurdy man, the immortal horse ashtray, the immortal block of ice; his other half, breathing in jerks was counting over the wood with Obértyshev. Now Obértyshev had finished counting, now he was putting on his coat, now—all teeth—he had fiercely slammed the door and—

“Wait a minute, Masha—I think, I think, someone is knocking at the door.” No. There was nobody yet. He could still breathe, with his face to the ceiling, and listen to that voice so like what it used to be.

Dusk. The 29th had grown old. Fixed, dim, hag-like eyes—and everything shrivelling under their fixed glance. The ceiling bends in, the armchairs are squashed, the writing-desk, Martin Martinych, the bed; and on the bed—Masha is quite flat, like cardboard.

It was dusk when Selikhov came, the chairman of the house-committee. There had been a time when he had weighed sixteen stone, but now half of him was gone; in his jacket nut-shell, he was like a nut in a rattle. But he still rattled out his old laugh.

“Well, Martin Martinych, firstly—secondly—may I congratulate your consort on her name-day. Yes, yes! Obértyshev has told me . . . ”

Martin Martinych jumped as if he had been shot out of his chair, ran off, began hurrying about talking, just to talk . . .

“Tea . . . in a moment—this very moment . . . We have real tea today. Real! Let me just.”

“Tea? I’ll tell you what. I’d prefer champagne. Haven’t got any? You don’t say so! Gra-gra-gra! And think, only the other day, with a friend, I distilled spirits out of some Hoffmann Drops. What fun! He did get drunk! ‘I’m Zinovyev’, says he; ‘On your knees!’ Funny! And when I was coming home over the Parade Ground I met a man in nothing but a waistcoat, by God! ‘What are you doing?’ says I. ‘It’s all right,’ says he,—‘I had nothing on at all a moment ago; I’m hurrying home to Vasilyevsky.’ Funny, isn’t it?”

Masha, as flat as paper, laughed in her bed. Tying himself into the tightest of knots, Martin Martinych laughed louder and louder,—what fuel could he throw into Selikhov, that he might go on like that, without stopping?

But Selikhov stopped at last, and, gently smiling, became silent. He wagged right and left in his nut-shell of a jacket; then he got up.

He rattled on in the corridor, in the anteroom. A second more: in a moment he will be gone, or else—

The floor was slowly shaking and swimming under Martin Martinych. With a clayish smile, Martin Martinych was leaning against the doorpost. Selikhov was breathing heavily, trying to get his feet into his enormous galoshes.

In the galoshes, in his greatcoat, mammoth-like, he stiffened up, recovering his breath. Then, silently, he took Martin Martinych by the hand, silently opened the door leading into the Arctic study, and silently sat down on a sofa.

The floor in the study was like a block of ice, the block of ice cracked imperceptibly, drifted from shore, and carried away Martin Martinych, away, away—so that he could hardly hear Selikhov’s voice from the far-off sofa-shore.

“Firstly—secondly, my dear sir, I must tell you: that Obértyshev, I’d do for him, like vermin. But you understand me. If he makes an official statement, if he says, tomorrow I’ll go to the criminal police . . . What a worm! I can only give this advice: today, this very moment go and choke his throat with that wood.”

The block of ice drifted away quicker and quicker. Tiny, flat, imperceptible,—Martin Martinych answered—he answered himself; not about the wood—no, about something quite different.

“All right. I’ll do it today.”

“Good ! that’s good! He’s such a worm—such a worm, if you only knew! …”

It was still dark in the cave. Claylike, cold, blind—Martin Martinych was stupidly running into every one of the things crowded in the cave in Noah’s-ark like promiscuity. He had a shudder; a voice, like Masha’s, like what it used to be:

“What were you talking about with Selikhov? What? Ration-cards? And I was lying, Mart, and thinking: how nice it would be to pull myself together and go off somewhere—where there is sunshine. Oh, what a noise you are making! Are you doing it on purpose? You know I can’t bear it—I can’t, I can’t.”

It was like a knife on the window pane. But wasn’t it all one, now? Like a machine, legs and arms. It would take chains and a capstan to move them; they were like logs, and to turn the capstan one man was not enough: it needed three. Tugging at the chains with his utmost strength, Martin Martinych put on the fire the tea-pot, a pan, . . . threw in the last log from Obértyshev.

“Do you hear what I am telling you? Why don’t you speak? Don’t you hear me?”

That was not Masha, no, not her voice. Martin Martinych’s movements became slower and slower, his feet waded through quicksand, it was harder to turn the capstan. All of a sudden the chain gave way—the arm collapsed with a thud, stupidly carrying with it the tea-pot and the pan—it all fell on the floor with a crash; the cave-god hissed like a serpent. And from the distant shore, from the bed—a strange shrill voice:

“You are doing it on purpose! Go away! This minute! And I don’t want anyone, nothing, nothing. Go away!”

The 29th was dead, and dead the immortal hurdy-gurdy man, and the blocks of ice in the water, rosy in the sunset, and Masha. And it was well. And it was necessary that the unthinkable tomorrow should never be and that Obértyshev and Selikhov, and Martin Martinych and everything should die.

Like a machine, the far-off Martin Martinych was still fussing about something. Perhaps he was again lighting the fire, and picking up the pan, and making the tea-pot boil; and perhaps Masha was saying something—he heard nothing: he only felt a dull pain in his clay body from some words that had been said, from the corners of the chest of drawers, of the chairs, of the writing-desk.

Martin Martinych began slowly extracting from the writing desk old letters, a thermometer, a bit of sealing-wax, the box with tea, more letters. At last, from the innermost recess—the little dark-blue scent-bottle.

Ten: the light was on, now. Bare, harsh, simple, cold—like cave-life, and death—was the electric light. And so simple—next to the flat iron, to op. 74, to the cakes—the little blue scent-bottle.

The iron god again began to hum benevolently, devouring paper, yellow like parchment, bluish or white note-paper. The tea-pot quickly remembered itself and lifted its lid. Masha turned round:

“Is the tea ready? Mart, darling, give me”—then she saw. A second pierced through and through with clear, naked, cruel electric light; Martin Martinych squatting before the stove; over the letters—a rosy hue, like water in the sunset; and over there— the little blue . . .

“Mart . . . you are really thinking of . . .”

Silence. Devouring with indifference immortal words, bitter, and sweet,—yellow, white, or blue,—the iron god purred on quickly. And Masha—as naturally as she had asked for tea:

“Mart, darling! Mart, give it me!”

Martin Martinych smiled from the distance:

“But, Masha, you know: there’s only enough for one.” “Mart, but I am no more. This is not me any more, Mart; you understand—Mart!”

Oh, that voice, that very voice . . . And if he would only turn his face to the ceiling . . .

“Masha, I have deceived you: we have no wood in the study. So I went to Obértyshev, and there between the two doors . . . I stole—you understand? And Selikhov said I must take it back at once; and I have burnt it all, all!”

The iron god was quietly going to sleep. Before he went out, the vaults of the cave were slightly flickering, and the houses, and the rocks, and the mammoths, and Masha.

“Mart, if you still love me . . . Oh, Mart, just remember! Mart darling!” The immortal horse ashtray, and the hurdy-gurdy man, and the block of ice. And that voice . . . Slowly Martin Martinych got up from his knees. Slowly, working the capstan with difficulty, he took the blue scent-bottle from the table and gave it to Masha.

She threw off her blanket, sat up in bed, rosy-cheeked, swift, immortal, like that walk in the sunset—she seized the scent-bottle and laughed.

“There you are: it was not for nothing that I lay in bed and thought—of going away somewhere. Light another lamp—that one, on the table. There. Now something more into the stove.”

Martin Martinych without looking, shoved out some papers from the drawer of the desk and threw them into the stove.

“Now, go for a little walk. I think it’s moonlight—my moon: you remember? Don’t forget—take the key, or else you’ll slam the door—and who will open it?”

No, there was no moon. Low, dark, dense clouds—like vaults, and everything—one enormous silent cave. Narrow, unending passages between the walls; and dark, icy rocks, looking like houses; and in the rocks—deep, purple-lighted holes; there, in those holes beside the fire—people squatting. A light icy draught carrying a white dust, and over the white dust, over the rocks, over the caves, over the people squatting—imperceptible to human ears—the huge, measured steps of some super-mammothish mammoth.